As of last Friday (November 8) the government has effectively scrapped its controversial unabridged birth certificates rule for foreign minors travelling to South Africa. Home Affairs Minister Aaron Motsoaledi said in a statement that he had signed a waiver on Friday which allows foreign children to now enter the country without carrying additional supporting documents such as birth certificates and consent letters. Read: SA’s international tourist arrivals ‘not looking good’ Regulations around unabridged birth certificates for travelling minors have been in place since 2015 and has caused significant harm to South Africa’s inbound tourism sector, reportedly costing billions of rand in foreign earnings. It has hit international family travel to the country and has contributed to the decline in foreign tourist arrival numbers this year. Moneyweb first reported on the plan to scrap the rule a month ago, when Minister Motsoaledi confirmed that this was part of the government’s new, more relaxed visa regime. It is one of the measures taken by President Cyril Ramaphosa’s administration aimed at boosting economic growth, unlocking bottlenecks and lowering the cost of doing business in the country. LISTEN: Home Affairs Minister Dr Aaron Motsoaledi talks to Moneyweb’s Nompu Siziba on expediting visas: <a href="https://iono.fm/e/754921">Content hosted by iono.fm</a> Also, read: Tourism wins: Government to abolish unabridged birth certificate rules In his statement this week, Motsoaledi noted that the waiver to the rule has been applicable since Friday. However, South African children are still required to provide supporting documents, in line with the requirements of the Children’s Act. The same applies to unaccompanied foreign children to SA. “This improvement in our admissions policy builds on the work the department has been doing to contribute to economic growth and investment. As of Friday, November 8, 2019, foreign children can enter and depart the country without being required to provide birth certificates, consent letters and other supporting documents relating to proof of parentage,” he said. The Department of Home Affairs has communicated the changes to immigration officials at ports of entry and to the airline and maritime industries. It noted that foreign children who require a visa for South Africa do not need to carry the supporting documents for inspection at a port of entry, since these would be processed together with their visa applications. Motsoaledi said it’s significant that government had completed the policy changes in the week in which President Cyril Ramaphosa hosted the second South African Investment Conference. “We anticipate that this change will have a positive impact on tourism as we approach the holiday season,” he added. Tourism industry bodies and Tourism Minister Mmamoloko Kubayi-Ngubane have hailed the move. “This is an audacious move by Home Affairs Minister Dr Aaron Motsoaledi that will clear all the confusion around travel requirements and ease travel for tourists coming into South Africa,” says Tshifhiwa Tshivhengwa, CEO of the Tourism Business Council of South Africa (TBCSA). “We are delighted with this move because it is another step in the right direction. The TBCSA has been working closely with the Department of Home Affairs in identifying and removing barriers to entry into South Africa. The department has shown a great interest in supporting tourism growth while securing South Africa’s borders and the TBCSA is very pleased with the speed at which they are working to improve ease of travel.” Meanwhile, Tshivhengwa notes that the decision will go a long way in opening up South Africa as a family-friendly destination. “We wish to continue to encourage government to prioritise improving ease of travel into South Africa as this will help unlock growth in our sector. The tourism sector’s potential is enormous in this country and, given the necessary space to grow, it will stimulate the economy and create more jobs,” he says.