The financial woes dogging South Africa’s behemoth state power utility show little sign of letting up even as the government grants it massive bailouts. Eskom, which supplies 95% of the nation’s electricity, posted a R1.3 billion profit in the six months through September, about double a year earlier. However, it still anticipates a R20 billion loss for the full year due to lower demand and prices in the summer months. Eskom’s debt burden rose to R454 billion, from R440 billion at the end of March. “The Eskom turnaround remains a long and difficult journey,” Jabu Mabuza, Eskom’s chairman and acting CEO, said at the results presentation on Thursday. “The ultimate goal is to make Eskom profitable.” Eskom’s precarious state stems from years of mismanagement, a bloated wage bill, massive cost overruns at two new coal-fired power stations and maintenance backlogs at other plants that left it struggling to meet demand. The government has said the utility is too big to fail and allocated it R138 billion over the next three years to enable it to keep operating. Yet that isn’t likely to be enough to ensure its viability. Freeman Nomvalo, who was named Eskom’s chief restructuring officer on July 30, is considering options to reorganise its debt. The government plans to split the utility into generation, distribution and transmission units under a state holding company — a reorganisation it says will make it easier to raise financing and improve efficiency. This month it announced that Andre de Ruyter, currently the CEO of packaging company Nampak, will take the helm at Eskom on January 15. Read: Unions lukewarm on Eskom’s new CEO Highlights from the results: Mabuza reflected on developments and milestones in Eskom’s turnaround plan since July: – The promulgation of the Integrated Resource Plan (IRP) set the base for much-needed policy direction in the future of the country’s energy mix. This in turn enables Eskom to plan properly for the integration of additional capacity. — Eskom Hld SOC Ltd (@Eskom_SA) November 28, 2019  The appointment of the GCE of Eskom brings further leadership stability to our business and enables us to advance towards a sustainable future. We are fortunate to have the expertise of an experienced leader such as Mr de Ruyter to steer Eskom towards achieving our vision… — Eskom Hld SOC Ltd (@Eskom_SA) November 28, 2019  Of equal importance is the approval by government of the Special Appropriation Act which will provide for government to allocate further fiscal support to Eskom for the 2019/20 and 2020/21 financial years. — Eskom Hld SOC Ltd (@Eskom_SA) November 28, 2019  In view of the arrear debt by municipalities and individual users, which continues to escalate, it is encouraging that President Ramaphosa has recently called on all citizens to pay for the services they receive. — Eskom Hld SOC Ltd (@Eskom_SA) November 28, 2019  