Embattled sugar and property heavyweight Tongaat Hulett will release the “key findings” related to PwC’s forensic investigation into the group’s financials next Friday. The group is also expected to finally release its restated results for its 2018 financial year and 2019 results in the second week of December. Tongaat Hulett confirmed this in Sens statement on the JSE late on Monday, which also included a progress update on its debt negotiations with lenders. Read: Tongaat Hulett’s former CEO poorer after share price dive “The company anticipates releasing information on PwC’s key findings on the company’s website on Friday 29 November 2019. Shareholders are reminded that PwC’s forensic report is confidential and subject to legal privilege, and accordingly the report will not be published,” it said. “It is envisaged that the restated audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2018 and the audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2019 will be released in the week commencing 9 December 2019 to enable the company to hold its annual general meeting (‘AGM’) on 24 January 2020,” Tongaat Hulett noted. The latest statement follows its announcement on October 7 that the PwC forensic investigation had been completed, however the full report would not be release due to “legal privilege”. Tongaat Hulett got its legal advisors Bowmans Gilfillan Inc to appoint PwC to undertake the forensic investigation earlier this year. Read: Tongaat Hulett: Developments division under scrutiny PwC’s initial investigation had found accounting irregularities at Tongaat Hulett, which led to the company in May noting that it would need to restate its 2018 financial results. It later announced that it anticipates reporting a reduction in its equity by between R3.5 billion to R4.5 billion. Tongaat Hulett’s weaker balance sheet saw its debt shoot up and its share price plummet to a post-millennium low following the revelations. When the group decided to suspend trading on the JSE on June 10, its share price closed at of R13.21 having lost 75% of its value for the year. Tongaat Hulett’s CEO Gavin Hudson, who has been leading the turnaround of the company since being appointed in January this year, has not taken any media interviews in recent months while the company is still under a cautionary. Chris Logan of Opportune Investments, a former minority shareholder in the group and well-known shareholder activist, says he is not surprised that Tongaat Hulett is not releasing the forensic report. “They are clearly approaching this in a similar vein to how Steinhoff has handled things since its issues came to light, however Steinhoff was in a much bigger mess… Like Steinhoff, Tongaat has also virtually replaced its entire board.” Read: New chair and rash of changes for Tongaat board On the delay in releasing its financial results, Logan says it seems that the issues at Tongaat Hulett are “even more complex”. However, he notes that the company seems to “be on the right track” having progressed in terms of debt negotiations with its lenders and its turnaround strategy. “We are likely to hear more about this when Tongaat releases its results in December. After that, there should be no reason for the company not to lift its suspension of trade on the JSE, especially if it plans to do a capital raise as part of its turnaround plans,” he notes.