Within the past six months, Telkom finally reached tipping point. Despite adding 55 000 fibre connections, it lost a shocking 20% of its total fixed broadband base (including both DSL and fibre). The plan all along was to migrate customers away from its legacy copper network to fibre and fixed LTE (mobile), but one gets the sense that in its newfound rush to switch off its copper network, it is happy to lose customers at any cost. In 2017, this author noted here that “this situation has been entirely predictable for years now and Telkom is simply not doing a good enough job at migrating ADSL customers to fibre. It should do this for free to any customer who wants to move.” Back then the company was still optimistic, stating that “the decline … exhibited over the past few years has moderated with the base stabilising in the last two months.” Look how that’s turned out. Between September 2018 and September 2019, it lost 186 141 copper broadband lines, but only gained 55 577 fibre connections. This has caused tremendous pressure on its revenue line. Fixed data revenue from ‘traditional products’ (i.e. DSL) is down R400 million to R3.2 billion, while revenue from ‘new data products’ is up R200 million to R1.5 billion. It’s going backwards, and quickly. Worryingly, it says investment in fibre to the home has been “rationalised” (down 36% year on year) as it focuses on areas “showing a propensity for higher connectivity rates”. An alternate interpretation is that, because of strong competition from other providers, it has simply run out of viable areas to roll out fibre to. This is not just a problem in the consumer segment. Enterprise voice and data revenue from legacy products (fixed lines and DSL) is also in sharp decline, down 15% and 7% respectively. Of course, the mobile business is rocketing ahead and helping keep overall revenue stable. At this rate, however, Telkom is going to have very little fixed-line business left (in a year, it has lost 591 000 fixed line customers (23%), nearly 50 000 a month). Read: Without mobile, here’s how much trouble Telkom would be in It’s difficult to compare numbers against last year, due to the implementation of International Financial Reporting Standard (IFRS) 16, but there are four red flags in the results to end-September: All of this has meant a 35.7% cut to its interim dividend (to 71.5 cents). Who is Telkom’s target? A separate cautionary announcement on Tuesday revealed that the group is in negotiations regarding a potential acquisition. Also, Telkom’s mobile business is in a much stronger position than Cell C, which simply wasn’t the case a few years ago. * Hilton Tarrant works at YFM. He can still be contacted at hilton@moneyweb.co.za.