Private investigator Mike Bolhuis has endorsed a controversial settlement offer for Orthotouch investors, which may see them lose more than 90% of their original investments in the failed Highveld Syndication (HS) schemes. Bolhuis is the well-known owner of Specialised Security Services, which offers a range of private investigation services, including, according to its website, investigations into serious economic crimes. The endorsement appears in a lengthy document entitled ‘Project: Investment Schemes Salvaging Highveld Syndication Investments‘ which was posted on the Facebook page of Specialised Security Services on November 15. The document states that “if you invested in the property syndication scheme known as Highveld Syndication, reading this project will salvage your money and reinstate your investment income”. The document encourages investors to accept a settlement offer which would see investors receiving shares in the listed property group Accelerate, in place of their original HS investments. The document has gone viral on social media. The peculiar case of the Picvest billions (Part 1) (Background) The peculiar case of the Picvest billions (Part 2) (Background) The peculiar case of the Picvest billions (Part 3) (Overvaluation of properties) The peculiar case of the Picvest billions (Part 4) (Property transactions prior to HS companies being put into business rescue) The peculiar case of the Picvest billions (Part 5) (Disposal of properties contradicts the intent of the business rescue plan) Accelerate is a JSE-listed company. The CEO is Michael Georgiou, the son of property magnate Nic Georgiou, who is the patron and underwriter of Orthotouch. The Georgiou family, via various entities, is also the largest shareholder of the company. Settlement offer The Bolhuis document endorses a settlement offer published on the website of the Highveld Syndication Investment Forum (HSIF) on November 12. The HSIF is linked to Helgard Hancke, a former member of the steering committee of the Highveld Syndication Action Group (the group pursuing the class action), who has seemingly joined forces with Nic Georgiou and is now marketing settlement agreements to investors. Hancke declined to speak to Moneyweb regarding the settlement offer, stating that he was “out of town on holiday”. He did not respond to questions that were emailed and WhatsApped to him on Monday. According to a document on the HSIF website, the salient terms of the offer are: The HSIF offer acknowledges that the Accelerate share price is low but states it expects the share price to reach “exceptional heights in the next two to three years and the possibility of R10 exists”. The Bolhuis document broadly echoes these terms but does not emphasise that despite a statement that investors will only lose 75% of their historic investment, the terms of the offer and the current low share price of Accelerate will result in losses exceeding 90%. The provisions of the Section 155 Scheme of Arrangement will remain applicable to investors if they reject the offer. The reality of the Accelerate settlement offer The reason investors will lose much more than 75% is that the number of Accelerate shares investors will receive is based on Accelerate’s NAV of R7.50 a share and not Accelerate’s prevailing share price of around R1.84. (Accelerate’s most recent financial statements indicate a NAV of R8.09 a share.) The impact is explained in the tables below, where an original R100 000 investment is used as an example. Current HSIF proposal Original HS investment R100 000 Offer at 25% of the original investment R25 000 Accelerate net asset value (NAV) per share R7.50 Number of Accelerate shares to be issued to the investor 3 333  Actual investment at Accelerate share price Original HS investment R100 000 Offer at 25% of the original investment R25 000 Number of Accelerate shares issued to the investor in terms of the NAV per share of R7.50. 3 333 Current Accelerate share price on the JSE (21 Nov 2019) R1.84 The actual value of 3 333 Accelerate shares at the prevailing share price R6 133 Percentage investors will receive of their original investment at share price of R1.84 6.13% In terms of the HSIF offer, an investor would receive 3 333 Accelerate shares if the original investment was R100 000. Investors would then qualify for a settlement of R25 000 (25% of the initial investment) at R7.50 per Accelerate share. However, Accelerate’s share price at the time of writing the article was R1.84, which means that the value of the 3 333 shares is only R6 133, or 6.13% of the original R100 000 investment. It is unclear why the Bolhuis document did not highlight this. Response In response to questions, Vaughan Schwartz, national chief specialist investigator: serious economic crimes at Specialised Security Services, said the firm’s endorsement of the offer is based on the NAV. “If the share trading price is used as per your calculation then the recovery is 6%, and the loss is 94%, but my recommendation is based on a net asset value of R7.50 per share as per the share option 1 notice.” Schwartz said the firm became involved after an investor approach it out of desperation. “He was bombarded with circulars and notices which he did not understand. He tried to get advice from his broker, who wasn’t very helpful and in desperation, he approached Mike Bolhuis, who has a reputation for being the last resort. “To help him, we had to do extensive research. Once we had finished our research, it became apparent to me that the majority of the investors were probably in the same position as our client and needed help. I then had the project prepared from the research and posted on our public platform. The article aimed to inform the public that Mike Bolhuis is now involved and explain the HS position as simply as possible, with the options as well as our recommendations.” Schwartz said Specialised Security Services was not paid to publish the document on its Facebook page. “We were not paid to place the project in the media, it is our firm’s policy and civic duty to make the public aware of crime in all its forms, thereby preventing crime. “This project aimed to assist the public with understanding the HS collapse so they could make an informed decision as to what they should do, mainly with regards salvaging their investment. However, we hoped that the public may come forward, as they usually do, and furnish us with damming [sic] evidence which will assist with criminal charges. We have already had some information from the public which is highly confidential as well as another powerful lobby group has started to exchange information with us and this is only within days of publishing our article. “We intend to prepare urgent follow-up projects on HS and other investment schemes that we are busy with, as the public needs to be repeatedly warned against risky investments and the devastating consequences,” said Schwartz. Also read: Georgiou puts Orthotouch and Zephan into business rescue   