The Reserve Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) decided to keep the repo rate on hold 6.5% and the mortgage rate at 10%. Three members preferred to keep interest rates on hold and two preferred a 25-basis point cut. Reserve Bank Governor Lesetja Kganyago said: “Monetary policy actions will continue to focus on anchoring inflation expectations near the mid-point of the inflation target range in the interest of balanced and sustainable growth. In this persistently uncertain environment, future policy decisions will continue to be highly data-dependent, sensitive to the balance of risks to the outlook, and will seek to look-through temporary price shocks.” Despite a rebound in local GDP in the second quarter this year, economic indicators show growth will remain weak for the rest of the year. Inflation Kganyago said the medium-term inflation outlook is largely unchanged. Headline consumer price inflation (CPI) is seen peaking at 5.3% in the first quarter of 2020. Headline CPI inflation is expected to peak at 5.3% in the first quarter of 2020 and settle at 4.5% in the last quarter of 2021. pic.twitter.com/speJQs0b4B — SA Reserve Bank (@SAReserveBank) November 21, 2019   The medium-term inflation outlook is largely unchanged since September. The forecast for core inflation is lower at 4.2% in 2019 (down from 4.3%), at 4.5% in 2020 (down from 4.7%) and remains steady at 4.6% in 2021. pic.twitter.com/8qAndgS689 — SA Reserve Bank (@SAReserveBank) November 21, 2019  Food price inflation continues to surprise to the downside on a monthly basis, and is expected to peak at about 6.1% in the third quarter of 2020. Five-year-ahead inflation expectations also declined to 5.0% (from 5.1%). Growth Despite a rebound in local GDP in the second quarter of this year, indicators suggest that economic activity will remain weak for the rest of the year. The country’s economic growth rates were revised lower. The forecast of GDP growth for 2019 is revised lower at 0.5% (from 0.6%). The forecasts for 2020 and 2021 have decreased to 1.4% (from 1.5%) and 1.7% (from 1.8%), respectively. pic.twitter.com/NR0PfNeNsC — SA Reserve Bank (@SAReserveBank) November 21, 2019  Commenting on 2020’s 1.4% growth forecast, Rand Swiss Senior Analyst Viv Govender tweeted that historically the forecasted figure can be cut in half to get closer to the actual number. He is thus “expecting GDP to grow by 0,7% in 2020.” Rand Since the September MPC, the rand has depreciated slightly by 0.6% against the US dollar, and by 0.8% against the euro. “While the rand has benefited from improvements in global sentiment, investors remain concerned about domestic growth prospects and fiscal risks.” Kganyago said across barring significant shocks, monetary policy in major economies will remain accommodative in the medium term. The risk of renewed market volatility however, remains high. The governor said business confidence remains weak and that the risk of further capital flow has increased, which could put pressure on the exchange rate. Industry reaction While it was somewhat expected, the MPC’s decision to hold rates seemed largely disappointing. Seeff Property Group chair Samuel Seeff said the MPC’s decision is disappointing, given the challenging year for the property market. “The news that inflation had dipped to a nine-year low of 3.7% (from 4.1% in September) along with a reasonably stable currency should have been enough to motivate a rate cut. “The economy and consumers can do with some good news and it would have been a welcome boost as we head into the important retail season,” he says. Against the backdrop of a persistently sluggish economy, subdued market confidence and lower-than expected inflation, but with an eye on future inflationary impacts, global economic headwinds and the prospect of a Moody’s downgrade, the Monetary Policy Committee’s decision to hold the repo rate steady was anticipated by many commentators, albeit disappointing for many at this juncture of the year. Pam Golding Property CEO Dr Andrew Golding believes there was room for a further rate cut, as inflation appears to have been reigned in to some extent. :Even a modest reduction in the key lending rate, on the back of the previous interest rate cut in July (2019), would have been widely welcomed by consumers – including aspirant home buyers, and would provide some relief to existing home owners with mortgage debt. “Undoubtedly, while still enjoying the warm afterglow of South Africa’s Rugby World Cup triumph, what our economy now needs is a concerted stimulus and decisive action to instil confidence among consumers and investors.” As expected no change. Despite low inflation we need to protect the rand in case we are downgraded and the repo rate is the key instrument. What we really need is SOEs to stop consuming tax income. Their private sector competitors actually pay taxes. https://t.co/sCesVmfb6j — Michael Jordaan (@MichaelJordaan) November 21, 2019 