This is a right of reply from Dr Kelvin Kemm, the former chairman of Necsa, to the article ‘Necsa board sends explosive letter to Parliamentary committee’, written by Chris Yelland of EE Publishers. The article is based on this letter from Necsa. The article by Chris Yelland attacking myself and my former board of Necsa and the headline referring to an ‘explosive letter’ being sent to the parliamentary committee by the current board is misleading. Under my chairmanship Necsa was one of the few SOEs to make an operating profit and to actually pay millions in tax into SARS.  Tribute for these achievements must also be paid to the former CEO Mr Phumzile Tshelane, who was then fired by the subsequent board. Note that without any warning, former energy minister Jeff Radebe fired me and my entire board, plus put the CEO on immediate suspension.  He instructed the CEO to leave the property immediately. The reasons for these strange actions were extremely dubious.  On Radebe’s list of accusations number one was that I authorised senior scientists and managers to attend overseas meetings without authorisation. Within 24hrs we were able to show that these accusations were false. Other accusations were equally strange.  We then found out that Radebe had been secretly assembling a new board from four months prior to our axing. This fact is contained in his court papers. It was also revealed in the media that Radebe had been covertly holding discussions with an American company to sell a highly profitable Necsa subsidiary to a US company. Radebe then appointed a totally new hand-picked board. It should be noted that most of this board have since resigned and that it is now sub-quorate. On 15 October 2019 the Chairperson of the Parliamentary Mineral Resources and Energy Committee, Mr Sahlulele Luzipo, in referring to Necsa said: “Our view is that there is no board at the corporation and there can never be stability.” Myself, Mr Tshelane and Ms Pam Bosman, from my board, then challenged Radebe’s actions in court and won. The judge ruled the actions of Radebe as ‘unlawful’ and set them aside. 
It is the current sub-quorate board that Yelland quotes as blaming me, the past CEO and my board for a host of issues. There was no ‘misuse of funds’ under my term.   In fact the Auditor General awarded us a trophy for submitting totally clean books for FY 2016/17.  During the presentation speech the AG pointed out what pleasure it had been to work with such a well organised group. As far as reference to the Auditor General’s report for FY2017/18 is concerned, there is misrepresentation inherent unless one examines in detail what actually happened. The standard process was that the AG received financial statements and documents on 31 May 2018. The AG then examines them and asks probing questions. ( we always found the AG questions to be good, deep and beneficial). Comprehensive explanations and projections are then supplied to the AG. These are then addressed in the report which comes out later on 31 August. However, after my board was removed so rapidly, the final management report which came out appeared as if the report of 31 August never existed. It seemed to revert to the 31 May report. As a result a false impression is created. Also, basic logic should cause any thinking person to ask: how come an organisation which gets an AG award one year seems to go downhill the next year, under the same team, while conditions are improving. Think: maybe there is more to this. We also requested an assessment of myself, the CEO and the entire board, by the Institute of Directors (IOD). The result of a long process, was a glowing IOD report in which we scored high marks in the top quartile of all South African companies. The Necsa letter furthermore says that in FY2018/19 ‘Necsa raided R268m from the Safari Spent Fuel Waste Disposal Fund’. My board was rapidly removed in early December 2018 and we know nothing of that.
The Necsa letter claims that ‘Necsa has been making massive operating losses since 2014’. This is not true. The AG checked all books under a microscope. We were profitable and paid tax into SARS. Then Radebe stepped in, for questionable reasons, replacing my board, and the result has been a plunge into chaos, resulting in trade union protests, when the new board announced their intention to retrench hundreds of staff. Under CEO Tshelane nobody was retrenched. The Necsa letter says that R445 million of ‘ring-fenced’ funds were used for operations. This certainly did not happen under my board. The letter then refers to a period two years ago, without pointing that out, and refers to Necsa being ‘forced’ to ‘raid’ R100 million from the Safari Spent Fuel Waste Disposal Fund. The Necsa letter refers to an amount of R100 million being taken out of the spent fuel fund and then repaid to the fund. That is correct, that was two years ago. What happened was that Nedbank demanded R100 million as collateral for an overdraft of less than that amount.  It was near year-end so we moved R100 million from the spent fuel fund to a fund to which the bank had access. Note: both accounts in the same bank.  Then shortly after that the annual parliamentary grant arrived, so we repaid the money to the fund. The Necsa letter also claims that this resulted from Nedbank withdrawing an overdraft facility ‘due to the absence of a turnaround strategy’.  The ‘turnaround strategy’ is total nonsense.  We had an excellent ‘go straight ahead strategy’ in place.  When Necsa exported manufactured assemblies to another country, earning some millions in forex, Nedbank refused to take payment from the customer. We battled with Nedbank for months to get our money. We did not succeed. It later came to light that Nedbank did not want to deal with the word ‘nuclear’. Calling the spent fuel fund ‘ring-fenced’ shows a lack of understanding of nuclear operations. Necsa internally maintains a savings account to fund the final disposal of spent nuclear fuel at some undetermined date in the future, when the government decides on a national policy for such disposal. In the meantime the spent fuel is totally safely stored by Necsa in highly secure transitional storage. The spent fuel fund is made visible internationally to show the rest of the world that South Africans are responsible and are intelligently looking to the future. Finally, Necsa Parliamentary reports were not late until Jeff Radebe was appointed. Then a critical letter which needed his signature for the AG to approve a certain provision, was not signed for five months.  We appealed eternally for the signature.  When we finally got it, at the finish line, I appealed to parliament for a two-week extension to be able to accommodate this in the report. The request was granted, but since it was six weeks to Christmas, Parliament instructed that the report be presented in February.  It was not ‘six months late’ as claimed by the Moneyweb article. Under my board and under former CEO Tshelane; Necsa was thriving and gained international recognition and awards. We showed how to run an SOE to be proud of. Then the previous minister intervened in a most aggressive manner. Dr Kelvin Kemm is the former chairman of Necsa Read: Nuclear energy company’s not-so-secret plan to beat the courts and Leave Necsa alone, says CEO