The world of collecting is a fascinating one – there is hardly an item, however arcane it may be, that someone somewhere does not have an interest in collecting. There are people who collect stamps, cigarette cards, beer bottles and even comics, among other items. The world of collectors’ of Classic Cars and classic motoring memorabilia has moved from compulsive hoarding to that of a lucrative investment prospect and in the last 20 years, this trend has gone from a small group of enthusiasts to a multi-million dollar industry, encompassing businesses dedicated to acquiring and restoring desirable automobiles, to wealthy individuals who amass a collection of exotic and rare vehicles purely from a lucrative investment point of view. In the United Kingdom, the United States and in Europe, the sheer quantity and scale of this business of collecting is mind-boggling and values over the years have shot up, particularly in respect of the more exotic and scarce marques. But where does that leave you and me? How do I, as a person with relatively limited means invest in this market? As with any foray into a specialised investment niche, there are plenty of caveats that can trip up the unwary and inexperienced investor. In the case of motor vehicles, this is no different. Let’s have a look at some of these pitfalls. Know-how If you plan to buy a vehicle for future investment purposes and you are not familiar with values and saleability, it is best to do some intensive research or engage the services of someone in the know, before you make that purchase. Remember that emotion can often override common sense and that old MG may bring you nothing but heartache. Here are some of the common pitfalls when purchasing a vehicle for investment purposes: In conclusion, be a little hard-headed about your purchase and restoration expenditure if you are buying for investment purposes. If you are an enthusiast and want to buy for the personal joy and satisfaction of owning an iconic vehicle from another era, then you may not mind buying with your heart, but beware – what starts out as a romantic notion can swiftly become a financial and mechanical liability and a heartbreak. You must be resilient and be prepared to get your hands dirty from time to time! David Crossley, Business Manager, BDO Wealth Advisors The views and opinions shared in this article belong to their author, cannot be construed as financial advice, and do not necessarily mirror the views and opinions of Moneyweb.