Growthpoint Properties CEO Estienne de Klerk says the company’s tenants in corporate South Africa have experienced slow economic growth, and he foresees the slump continuing into next year. “In the South African context, our economy is really under a lot of pressure,” he says. Growthpoint, SA’s largest listed real estate investment trust (Reit), has property offerings in the office, retail and industrial space, with R80 billion worth of real estate investment in SA. Its portfolio includes about 49 retail properties, with shopping centres feeling the pinch the most, says de Klerk. He adds that its corporate office space has not been spared in this declining wave. Despite knock the economy has taken, he says the industrial sector has performed the best – even though it is obviously not immune to the current economic climate. “We have 2.2 million square metres of industrial warehousing and logistics facilities, and, to be honest, across the economy we are seeing distress,” says de Klerk. “We are hoping that some of the initiatives from government, where they are looking at injecting life into the economy, will start paying off for us going forward,” he adds. Sandton Precinct Not even Africa’s richest square mile has been left unaffected by SA’s slow economic growth. De Klerk points out that Sandton has seen unprecedented growth. “And when you look at the amount of development, it has happened in the [Sandton Precinct] node – but we are faced with a weak economy, and I think it will persist for a while, and this will make it difficult for Sandton in the short-term.” He says an oversupply of office space in the area is the problem. “The precinct has office space ranging from investment grade right through to what we deem C-grade offices [the lowest specification available] – and clearly the pain is towards the bottom end, the B- and C-grade type of offices,” says de Klerk. Despite this, he is optimistic that Growthpoint will reap the benefits in the long-term. “I think over time we will see some of the benefits of the infrastructure that has gone into Sandton,” he says. “We have also strategically taken a position in that market that, should the economy grow to some extent, we should be able to accommodate the expansion of the precinct.” Eastern Europe De Klerk is however more optimistic about its international operations. In December 2016, Growthpoint made a significant investment into London-listed Globalworth, a real estate investment company in Poland. He says it has since developed Globalworth into one of the largest real estate companies in the region. He says the real estate environment in Poland and Europe as a whole are fertile. “The market in both those environments is growing very strongly. They grew between 5% and 6% respectively last year. This year the forecast is between 4% and 6%.” De Klerk says these growth levels are better than those Growthpoint has been seeing in South Africa, and their office and industrial sectors are performing well. “The properties that we own are the best of breeds in those markets, and with strong economic growth, they act as a diversifier to the SA economy to some extent.” De Klerk says that to be able to invest in developed countries such as those in Europe has been a relief. “To have the opportunity to invest in a higher growth and lower risk environment does not come along every day.” Growthpoint Oz Australia is the site of another international investment that has yielded strong returns – Growthpoint Properties Australia (GOZ). De Klerk says the 2009 investment Growthpoint made into a small Australian company that had only 26 industrial properties has grown to own about 60 properties. “This company owed the bank a lot of money – its market cap has grown from $40 million to $3.4 billion,” he adds. He says GOZ is now the 10th largest Reit in Australia. Its assets are predominantly industrial and metropolitan office. “Both those sectors have been in the sweet spot from an investment perspective,” says de Klerk. He says its big clients include the Australian government, Woolworths Australia, and a new police station. Read: Growthpoint to bid for Capital & Regional despite Brexit risks The plans for 2020 in a nutshell   