The country is in deeper trouble than most think. South Africa’s debt to gross domestic product may be as high as 70%, if the contingent liabilities of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) are included. This puts SA right at the top end – if not above – the level of “acceptability” in emerging markets, according to Nedbank Group CEO Mike Brown. In a discussion around the potential economic growth infusions at the Nedgroup Treasurers’ conference this week he said many of these entities are going to become real liabilities faster than we think. No room for debt-induced stimulus Brown said there was absolutely no scope for any debt-induced stimulus in the economy. “The truth is that most of the extra money that has built up as debt has been spent on consumption and not investment … and has had very little impact on improving the capacity of our economy to grow.” The South African economy contracted by 3.2% in the first quarter of the year, the biggest since the 2008 financial crisis. It caught markets and analysts by surprise. Commentators said the fact that the contraction was “broad-based” made it even more concerning. Fundi Tshazibana, advisor to the governors of the South African Reserve Bank (Sarb), says the bank’s forecast for growth is an average of 1% for 2019. Growth in the next three quarters “This was based on expectations of a smaller contraction in the first quarter. Given the actual outcome, growth above 3% is now required in each of the remaining quarters of 2019 to achieve the projected growth of 1%.” Overall, growth prospects are not good. “Weak business confidence, possible electricity supply constraints and high debt levels in certain state-owned enterprises will continue to limit investment prospects,” she said at the conference. Tshazibana did not refer to the recent public fumbling within the ruling party regarding the mandate of the Sarb. ANC Secretary-General Ace Magashule announced that the mandate would be expanded to include growth and employment following the three-day ANC national executive committee lekgotla that kicked off on June 1. However, Finance Minister Tito Mboweni and President Cyril Ramaphosa refuted the statement to calm the markets, with the assurance that the mandate will stay as it is. Economic growth a ‘central feature’ Tshazibana said economic growth is in fact an “explicit part” of the policy equation in the Sarb’s quarterly projection model. It is a central feature of all policy discussions. “I have come across arguments that the Sarb does not care about growth. I must say, I do not recognise this image of the Sarb in the policy processes that I see and participate in day to day.” She said that while the bank recognises the role that monetary policy has to play in the economy, this is in the context of smoothing output fluctuations over the business cycle. “The current challenges constraining South Africa’s economic growth are primarily structural in nature,” she added. Push-pull policy approach The country has experienced a series of shocks, including insufficient electricity supply, protracted and violent strikes, weak investment in the mining and manufacturing sectors, severe drought and very low business confidence, primarily because of the pull-push approach by senior government officials around critical policy matters such as the mandate of the Sarb and land reform. Low growth potential is a serious problem for policy. “Investment appetites are strongly influenced by what government chooses and how fast the choices are implemented,” Tshazibana said. She added that the willingness of firms to invest also depends on their expectations of future economic activity, the opportunities available, the cost of investing, as well as whether they believe that their property rights are protected. These also contribute to firms’ hiring decisions. Tshazibana remarked on the fact that South African prices and inflation remain elevated relative to those of its trading partners. The bank is of the view that pricing practices, market structure, and other supply-side rigidities may be to blame. Reducing the cost structure of the economy requires the implementation of “credible structural policy initiatives”, she added. “In an environment of limited resources and constrained policy space, I would advocate that policy certainty is the cheapest form of stimulus for this economy.” Again without referring to the spat over the mandate and independence of the Sarb, she said “understanding and clearly communicating the role of various institutions and policy instruments is important”.