A calculation each and every person should run at least once a year is to work out how much they need to be financially free. The problem is that the number this calculation spits out is often terrifying. This may even lead you to end your quest to achieve financial freedom then and there, because the number seems more demotivating than inspirational. If only there was a way for money to multiply like bunnies … Fortunately there is. And when you make use of this incredibly powerful weapon known as compound interest, it is possible to gun down even the largest of numbers with the smallest of contributions – if you give it enough time. Breeding like rabbits What happens is that the original bunnies start making more bunnies, and continue making more bunnies. But then the more bunnies also start making more bunnies of their own, and those more bunnies go on to make even more bunnies! I think you get the idea. Compound interest works in exactly the same way. And to help you realise just how much power your money bunnies have (especially if your time horizon is still long), I have put together an investment calculator. You can download the spreadsheet here. Using the calculator is straightforward, but probably best explained by way of an example. From the month my son was born, I started investing R500 per month towards his tertiary education. At the time, I estimated that a four-year degree would cost in the region of R120 000. With this information, let’s use the calculator to work out if I will have enough to cover a university degree by the time he is 18. The grey part of the spreadsheet is where you can type in the inputs, while hovering over the cells will give more information about each one. But in short: To summarise, here are the inputs used:  The calculator then spits out some numbers:  The ‘Own money’ value is the total of all the monthly contributions made. ‘Investment returns’ is the rand value that was generated from the compounded returns of the investment. Out of interest, I also included a ‘returns contribution to final investment value’, which is a percentage showing how much of the final investment amount is made up of compounded investment returns versus how much is from the ‘own money’. In this scenario, more than 80% of the final investment amount came from compounding returns – talk about bunnies getting busy! When looking at the ‘Final value’, it seems that it would be enough to cover a R120 000 degree more than five times over. Unfortunately, this is not quite true. We must remember that over the 18 years of investing, the cost of a tertiary qualification would have inflated by an estimated 9%. So we need to adjust the final investment amount to compensate for the increased cost of the degree. The last cell with the blue border, the ‘Inflation-adjusted total’, does just that – and I am left with an estimated R134 000 in today’s university cost money. It seems I will be okay – if my inputs hold true. The calculator also spits out some pictures that illustrate the benefit of compound interest over time. This first shows the final investment amount together with how much of that amount is made up by contributions, versus how much is made up by investment returns.  As you can see, in the first few years, the investment value is made up almost entirely of my own contributions. But after a few more years, the contributions start becoming a smaller part of the final investment amount, with more of the investment’s value coming from compounding returns. The progression of own contributions versus investment returns is shown in the final chart.  After the first year, only 6% of the investment value comes from returns. After five years, a quarter of the investment value is thanks to compounded returns. Then, after 13 years, more than half the value of the investment is due to compounding returns and, finally, by the end of the period a full 62.5% of the value of the investment has been courtesy of them bunnies. Inflation: The bunny killer Something you may have been surprised by is how the final rand value of R632 000 vaporised into just R134 000 after adjusting for inflation. That’s the problem with ‘investing’ in a bank account – it won’t really grow your money. The return from a bank account is usually in line with inflation and so, as your bunnies multiply, the older ones get killed off by inflation, and your bunny population stays the same. You don’t really move forward. Therefore, if you have a long time frame, you will likely be better off investing in growth assets (such as equities or property) because the expected returns will outpace inflation. And so you end up growing your money in real terms. Investing in growth assets is like dimming the lights, putting on some romantic music and lighting some candles for your money bunnies. You are going to see far better results! This article was republished with permission from Stealthy Wealth. The original can be found here.