EOH Holdings has moved to strengthen its board, appointing three high-profile nonexecutive directors, including a former MD of Vodacom South Africa. Anushka Bogdanov, Andrew Mthembu and Mike Bosman join the board of the ICT services company as independent nonexecutives with immediate effect. The appointments ensure the board is compliant with the King Code of Corporate Governance, said EOH chairman Xolani Mkhwanazi. Bogdanov started her career with Absa Corporate and Merchant Bank in 1993 before moving to Fitch Ratings in 1999 as senior director. In 2003, she joined Nedbank and during her time in the banking industry she helped improve risk-management capabilities, strengthening the use of business performance predictive models and building an analytics team made up of black South African mathematicians. Her most recent corporate role was at the Development Bank of Southern Africa before establishing her own risk management consulting firm. Andrew Mthembu is a former MD of Murray & Roberts in its toll roads concession business, Tolcon. He was subsequently appointed as MD of Vodacom South Africa, and was later charged with setting up its international operations. He now manages his own investment company and consults to various clients on ICT strategy. Mike Bosman, meanwhile, began his career in corporate and project finance before moving into advertising. As the youngest member of the Wilson Keller agency leadership, he led a management buyout. The new firm, Bosman Johnson, was later acquired by Lindsay Smithers FCB, of which Bosman became CEO. He built the company into South Africa’s largest ad agency. FCB North America then hired him as president and chief operating officer, based in New York. When his contract expired, he returned to South Africa and established his own consultancy and advised on several empowerment transactions. He later served as group CEO of TBWA\South Africa.  — (c) 2019 NewsCentral Media This article was originally published on TechCentral here.