Here’s what caught our attention on Friday: 1. Sona – a post mortem In delivering his second Sona of the year, President Cyril Ramaphosa pledged to allocate a significant amount of funds to the R230 billion that Eskom needs to service its debt, maintain its plants and ensure sustainable power supply. Ramaphosa said “with the current committed funding from the government outlined in the 2019 budget, Eskom has sufficient cash to meet its obligations until October 2019”. Read: Solving only half the problems 2. Spectrum policy direction to be issued An immediate task that Presidnet Cyril Ramaphosa has set, is to issue a policy direction to Icasa, South Africa’s communications regulator, within 30 days. Ramaphosa announced this during his state of the nation address, and is meant to lower data costs by allocating broadband spectrum to mobile operators. The task has been delegated to communications minister, Stella Ndabeni – Abrahams, according to TechCentral. Read: Spectrum policy direction within 30 days: Ramaphosa 3. Naspers results Media and e-commerce giant, Naspers is expected to release its financial results for the year ended March 31, 2019 on Friday. In a trading statement dated, June 12, 2019, the company said it expects core headline earnings per share to increase between 31% and 33%, while expecting headline earnings per share to increase between 118% and 121% for the period. It however expects earnings per share to decrease between 40% and 30% and attributes it to the gain in the $1.6 billion recognised on the disposal of the group’s interest in Flipkart and in the gain recorded in the distribution the MultiChoice Group to shareholders. Naspers has also been making a series of investments, namely in a digital payment service in Turkey, called Iyzico for $165 million and an investment in uber-like cleaning cleaning service, SweepSouth worth R30 million. Naspers invests in African Uber-like cleaning service start-up 4. Non-executive director at Discovery resigns Discovery has announced the resignation of its non-executive director, Robert Enslin, with immediate effect. The company says, Enslin’s resignation follows his recent appointment as President of Google Cloud Services’ Global Customer Operations. Enslin had been with Discovery as a non-executive director since May 2017. 5. Rand update The rand regained its shine this week, with inflation rate for May reported at 4.5% within the Central Bank’s target range, an uptick in gold stocks on the back of the US Fed’s dovish tone and indications of its readiness to cut interest rates. The US Fed also kept US interest rates unchanged in its meeting on Wednesday. Finally, a hopeful, state of the nation address, delivered by President Cyril Ramaphosa also helped the rand. According to Rand Swiss, the rand was at R14.33 to the dollar, following the Sona. This morning the currency was at R14.38 to the dollar at 8:44.