This past weekend South Africa commemorated the Soweto student uprising that made international headlines more than four decades ago. However, the state of education and the latest unemployment figures released by Statistics SA show that little progress has been made since then. Our youth – those aged between 15 and 34 years – account for 63.4% of the total number of unemployed people. Nedbank group CEO Mike Brown said at the recent Nedbank Group Investments Treasurer’s Conference in Johannesburg that SA is making very little progress on the education front. “In terms of skills, what we certainly can’t do is continue with a deployment-based approach in so many critical roles where we do not have people in the right jobs with the skills set required.” Poor rate of return He demonstrated the state of affairs in the education system with figures that show for every 100 students entering school, only 60 write matric, and maybe 40 pass, 12 get access to university and six get some form of undergraduate education. Only four get a postgraduate degree – six years after writing matric. “If you are thinking about the amount of money we spend on our educational system this is an extremely inefficient way of producing degrees at the end,” Brown said. National Treasury allocated R386.5 billion in the 2019 budget to “learning and culture”, which includes, among others, basic education, university transfers and the student financial aid scheme. Peace and security got R203.5 billion. The disappointing outcome has a lot to do with the quality of teaching. Brown referred to a study which demonstrated that 79% of teachers’ own competence is below the level they are teaching and only 16% is above. Income impact Another analysis took five income quantiles (putting income levels into 20% buckets) to see what kind of education children are getting. Brown looked at children who are in Grade 9 as an example. If their parents’ earnings are in the top income quantile they are actually getting a Grade 9 education. However, if they are in the bottom quantile their children are getting the equivalent of a Grade 3 education by the time they are in Grade 9. “That does show you how dysfunctional the education system is,” he said. “We simply cannot grow our economy and be competitive unless we fix the education system.” Brown says it may take 15 to 20 years, but it has to be done. The system currently works fine for the high earners who can afford to pay for functional or even private schools. If you are not a high earner it is extremely difficult to get an education that will equip your children to be employed and productive in the modern world. Top five risks to industry A recent report by the Institute of Risk Management SA (Irmsa), the ‘South Africa Risks 2019’, shows that industry considers structurally high unemployment; growing income disparity and inequality; and inadequate and/or substandard education and skills development among the top five risks facing SA. The Irmsa report highlights growing disillusionment among the youth of South Africa. The report warns that it could lead to a “youth-driven protest movement” on a much larger scale than the student protest movement. Irmsa chief risk advisor Christopher Palm says this will be a real consequence if we do not get unemployment down and our education system in order. “Although it is not a risk in itself, it certainly is a consequence of us not dealing with the major risk drivers, namely inadequate or substandard education, skills development and unemployment.” The Irmsa report quotes American economist Joseph Stiglitz, who wrote in his book The Price of Inequality: “If a country doesn’t give a large proportion of the population the education that they need to earn a decent living, if employers don’t pay a decent wage, if society provides so little opportunity that many people become alienated and demotivated then that society and its economy won’t work well.” Palm says it won’t help to “give” people an education for the sake of the numbers. They must be able to do the work, and to realise the values of significance and self-reliance. And the folly and ineffectiveness of “quick fixes” has to be emphasised.