Maybe, just maybe, the senior executives at the 20 or so state-owned entities (SOEs) should have ensured their financial governance were squeaky clean before they met President with Cyril Ramaphosa last week. Then they would not have had the spectre of why they had spent billions irregularly. Read: The indaba between SOEs and the president In the interests of transparency, I thought it prudent to disclose the key findings arising out of the latest external audit reports on the annual financial statements of these SOEs. Some of them have been discussed at the state capture inquiry, but this article is only concerned with the 2018 external audit reports. Our SOEs have demonstrated that they are quite adept at ignoring the National Treasury regulations, and contravening the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA) and the Companies Act. The SOEs who met with the President have run up irregular expenditure of a minimum of R178.5 billion by March 31, 2018. This is a showcase for how the South African Government has completely lost all semblance of control over these entities.  Irregular expenditure (IE) Qualified audit report Summary Rm Acsa 1 000 No Errors corrected, no consequence management for IE, ongoing investigations regarding IE and supply chain management. Alexkor 26 No Reported to Irba for reportable irregularities, faulty procurement process, proper and complete records not maintained, no consequence management Armscor 12 No The review and monitoring processes were not sufficient to prevent IE Atns 54 Yes Not sufficient appropriate audit evidence to confirm all IE was accounted for, certain material misstatements were not corrected, effective steps not taken to prevent IE and F&WE, credit cards not used for permitted purposes, no consequence management, significant internal control deficiencies Central Energy Fund (CEF) 3 No Misstatements were corrected, hence unqualified audit opinion. There is no consequence management for IE. DBSA 0 No Material misstatements were corrected Denel 513 Disclaimer The AG could not express an opinion. He was unable to obtain sufficient audit evidence to provide a basis for an audit opinion. There is a material uncertainty relating to going concern. Financials were not submitted for auditing within prescribed period. Denel contravened IFRS, the PFMA, and the Companies Act. No consequence re IE. Contraventions in procurement and contract management. Net loss for 2018 R1.8 billion. Eskom 20 713 Yes R143 million fruitless and wasteful expenditure. Material uncertainty relating to going concern. Reportable irregularities have been reported to Irba. The total comprehensive loss for the year is R5.6 billion. No consequence management. Contraventions in procurement and contract management. Private business interests not disclosed. IDC 0 No Land Bank 0 No Necsa 30 Disclaimer The AG could not express an opinion. He was unable to obtain sufficient audit evidence to provide a basis for an audit opinion. Financial figures could not be verified. The current liabilities exceed the current assets by R153 million. Management did not provide the AG with sufficient appropriate audit evidence to support the going concern assumption. Irregular expenditure not disclosed in notes to the financials. Material impairment of investment in subsidiaries of R134 million was incurred. PetroSA 2 463 No Material uncertainty related to going concern. Net loss of R666 million. Impairment loss of R240 million on property, plant and equipment (PPE).  Impairment loss of R1.2 billion on investment in subsidiaries. Financials didn’t receive a qualified opinion as misstatements were corrected. Prasa 25 200 Yes Material uncertainty related to going concern. Didn’t have an adequate system for identifying IE and wasteful expenditure, nor for property, plant and equipment. Unable to obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence. Net loss R924 million. Management only corrected some misstatements on the performance reporting, and the AG raised material findings on the usefulness and reliability of the reported performance information. PFMA was contravened as the financial statements were not submitted for auditing within two months after the end of the financial year end. Rand Water 117 No Misstatements were corrected hence unqualified opinion. The cause of the bulk of this IE is due to the inability of the organisation to respond timeously to regulatory prescripts and practice. Notes issued by National Treasury on procurement. SA Express Yes Yes Only the 2016 annual report is available. AG report qualified. IE unquantifiable. The entity did not have an adequate system for identifying and recognising all IE. Wasteful expenditure: R30.6 million. SAA 113 600 Yes Only the 2017 annual report is available. The SAA group did not establish adequate controls to maintain complete records of IE. The qualified report was based on inadequate systems in regard to property, aircraft and equipment, inventory, maintenance costs, IE and wasteful expenditure. Net loss was R5.569 billion at 2017, and liabilities exceeded its total assets by R17.801 billion. Fruitless and wasteful expenditure: R42.6 billion. SABC 4 997 Disclaimer Net loss R621.6 million. Liabilities exceeded assets by R291.6 million. The entity was commercially insolvent. Can’t account for all PPE. AG unable to obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence for PPE, and many other financial figures. Safcol 592 Yes Not all IE recorded. There were many accounting errors, and prior period figures had to be restated. However, supporting information was not provided, so not all necessary adjustments could be made. Sanral 347 No The accumulated loss is R14.5 billion. SA Post Office 109 No Material uncertainty related to going concern. Total loss for the year R908 million. Accumulated loss R3.3 billion. Trans-Caledon Tunnel Authority 618 No Effective and appropriate steps were not taken to prevent IE. Some of the goods, works or services, procured by the public entity, were not procured through a fair, equitable, transparent, cost-effective and competitive procurement process. No consequence management. Transnet 8 100 Yes External Auditor unable to obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence to confirm IE. Management only corrected some misstatements on the performance reporting, and the External Auditor raised material findings on the usefulness and reliability of the reported performance information. PFMA was contravened as the financial statements were not submitted for auditing within two months after the end of the financial year end. Significant internal control deficiencies. Appropriate risk management activities not implemented. Umngeni Water 33 No  178 527   It should be noted that an unqualified opinion does not, in my opinion, exonerate a company from contravening IFRS, and the PFMA. Where misstatements were detected by the external auditor, and subsequently corrected, an unqualified audit opinion is given. A ‘material uncertainty’ related to whether the entity is a going concern does also not result in a qualified opinion. The hall of shame: Forensic investigations and litigation Some of the SOEs in the spotlight are undergoing forensic investigations into serious issues other than IE and/or are embroiled in ongoing litigation. In the case of Alexkor, the Minister of Finance has initiated an investigation into alleged irregularities regarding awarding of the diamond marketing tender to a supplier. The CEF is a defendant in a number of litigation matters, the most significant of these relates to the court application to set aside the disposals of crude oil stock on the basis that the disposals were unlawful, invalid, and unconstitutional. A forensic investigation is being carried out by an independent consultant around matters relating to a contract review process conducted at Strategic Fuel Fund Association NPC, a subsidiary of the CEF. Eskom too is under scrutiny in ongoing investigations into alleged irregularities, fraud and corruption at the power utility. Petro SA has an obligation to rehabilitate and abandon its offshore and onshore operations valued at R8.1 billion with cash set aside of R2.4 billion and therefore the provision is currently underfunded by approximately R5.7 billion. Four investigations currently being undertaken by the South African Police Service’s directorate for priority crime investigation (Hawks) are looking into allegations relating to financial misconduct, fraud and improper conduct in supply chain management: Prasa is facing an ongoing lawsuit related to the purchase of locomotives. Forensic investigations arising out of the Public Protector’s 2015 report are ongoing. The Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation is investigating cases reported by Prasa in terms of the Prevention and Combatting of Corrupt Activities Act. In the 2017 AG report, paragraph 17 states that: “SAA did not report the reasons for not adopting a resolution to file for business rescue while the company was in financial distress to the affected parties, as required by section 129(7) of the Companies Act.” Read: Goodbye, SAA The Special Investigations Unit and the forensic unit of the SABC are in the process of conducting several investigations into instances and allegations of financial misconduct and possible fraud. Safcol is experiencing ongoing litigation in regard to fires. Read: Safcol irregular expenditure ballooned to R592m in 2018 An investigation into allegations of maladministration and irregular procurement processes relating to the Gauteng e-toll contracts at Sanral was conducted by the Public Protector, in terms of Section 182 of the Constitution. This investigation was concluded on January 30, 2018. Secondly, the Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation is currently investigating offences perpetrated against Sanral by various construction companies. This investigation has been ongoing since 2013. Transnet is facing ongoing investigations into alleged irregularities and potential fraud. Lease agreements were entered into with lessors without following formal lease application processes. The group instituted investigations into alleged procurement-related irregularities on the acquisition of 1 064 locomotives. Read: Transnet dismisses CEO amid procurement probe The PFMA requires that financial statements have to be submitted for auditing within two months of the financial year-end. I wonder how many SOE’s have already ignored this requirement? How many SOEs have inadequate systems of internal control and recording of financial statements? How many SOEs cannot even determine how many assets they have? How many more SOEs have a material uncertainty relating to going concern? How much more irregular expenditure has been incurred? The hall of shame is on the rise.