Here’s what caught our attention on Friday: 1. Almost 700 bank branches closed Standard Bank announcement this week regarding the closure of 104 of its bank branches across the country has put South Africa’s remaining traditional three banks in the spotlight. Moneyweb is reporting that the ‘big’ four banks have collectively closed 695 branches since their ‘respective peaks’ in the earlier part of the decade. Apart from the aforementioned banks, only Capitec Bank is expanding, and is said to have opened 840 branches by the end of February 2019. The ‘big bank’ branch closures are part of efforts to reduce space and branch footprint. Read: Here’s how many branches banks have shut in the last decade 2. Telkom shows SOEs the way It’s no secret that South Africa’s SOEs are in hot water. The most recent worry is Eskom and South African Airways operating without CEOs. However, partially privatised telecommunications company Telkom has devised a model that is proving resilient. TechCentral’s Duncan McLeod is reporting that Telkom, through its model, has shielded itself from ‘political meddling’ and that other troubled SOEs, who pose risks to SA’s economic stability, would do well to follow suit. Read: Telkom shows way to fix South Africa’s broken SOEs There’s a CEO crisis in SA and no one is stepping up 3. Foreign exchange reserves South Africa’s foreign reserves for May slipped to $43.178 billion from $43.245 billion in the previous month, data from the South African Reserve Bank showed on Friday. Gross reserves fell to $48.329 billion at the end of May, compared with $49.538 billion in April. 4. G20 finance meetings focus on trade tensions Finance and central bank chiefs of the Group 20 will be gathering in Japan this weekend. The G20 states include South Africa, Brazil, China, UK, US and Turkey, among others. Bloomberg is reporting that top of the agenda at the meeting would be the ongoing trade war between China and the US, while global monetary policy is also expected to be a key focus area. The G20 finance group has gathered annually since 1999. Read: Here’s what to watch at the G20 finance meetings this weekend 5. Rand update South Africa’s GDP contracting by 3.2% commanded market attention this week and contributed to rand weakness, but ongoing infighting within South Africa’s ruling party over Sarb’s mandate saw the rand continue on a downward trajectory. The currency reached just above the R15/dollar mark on Thursday afternoon. The ANC released a statement on Thursday, giving clarity on the matter, saying its policy on the central bank’s role has not changed. Moody’s rating agency said a potential interest rate cut by Sarb is possible in July. In the US, the Fed expressed concerns over the ongoing trade dispute with China and the global economic slowdown – which may prompt it to adjust its interest rates accordingly. On Friday, the rand continued its fall; at 8:38am the currency was at R15.10 to the dollar.