Two opposing forces are at play in emerging markets. The first is excitement over the dollar’s decline as speculation grows that the US will cut rates soon. And the second is dread over President Donald Trump’s trade war. While Mexico averted the start of new tariffs, Washington’s campaign to shake up trade agreements worldwide is still wreaking havoc on global economies. But the impact of Trump’s unpredictable tweets will probably be less detrimental on emerging assets if the dollar’s slide last week, the worst against a basket of currencies since February 2018, proves to be a trend.  “Broadly we remain constructive on emerging-market debt,” said Paul Greer, a London-based money manager at Fidelity International, whose emerging-market debt fund has outperformed 97% of peers this year after reducing risk in the first quarter. “We now see some opportunities re-emerging after a tough last three to four months for EM currencies.” Developing-nation local-currency bonds capped an eighth day of gains on Friday, the longest winning streak since January 2018. Russia’s central bank Governor Elvira Nabiullina said policy makers may reduce interest rates for the first time in a year at their meeting on Friday. Traders have boosted wagers for rate cuts to the highest in more than a year. The Turkish central bank is due to set rates on Wednesday. Almost all of the economists surveyed by Bloomberg expect the monetary authority to hold rates, even after inflation slipped below 19% last month. Despite the lira’s recent gains, it’s probably still premature to ease monetary policy, with the bank only reversing an emergency rate hike as recently as in May, according to Bloomberg Economics. Peru’s central bank will probably keep its benchmark lending rate at a nine-year low for a 15th straight meeting on Thursday as trade tensions depress copper prices and damp the outlook for exports. China’s export growth unexpectedly rebounded in May, while imports fell more than forecast amid the escalating trade war with the US, data showed on Monday. Other releases this week, which include fixed-asset investment, retail sales and industrial production, will help shed light on how the economy is holding up ING Groep in a June 6 note said, “the economy seems to be experiencing only tremors right now and growth appears to be holding up, as in the first quarter of the year.”