The South African retirement fund industry has experienced some of its most challenging periods during the past few years. Pedestrian market returns have resulted in inflation beating investment portfolio returns being hard to come by. Slow economic growth has put pressure on membership growth and the ability of members to preserve their retirement savings when changing employers or being laid off. The introduction of further regulatory changes and compliance measures as part of National Treasury’s retirement reform added an additional layer of complexity to the challenge of ensuring that members retire with sufficient capital. How Boards of Trustees, Management Committees and financial service providers respond to these challenges will be critical for the future financial wellbeing of retirement fund members. The perfect storm Ineffective government policies, structural deficiencies, strained labour relations, low business and consumer confidence as well as levels of fixed investment resulted in local economic growth of around 0.8% per annum over the last five years. The pressure on household finances led to many retirement fund members opting not to preserve their retirement fund savings when moving between jobs with emigration adding to the outflow of industry assets. There were therefore no meaningful growth in the membership and assets of retirement funds in South Africa over the past few years. A stagnant retirement fund industry, low investment returns, increasingly demanding regulatory requirements and the need to maintain or grow their profits created the perfect storm from a fiduciary responsibility and financial service provider perspective. One-stop solution One of the few ways for service providers to achieve their business and financial objectives is to try and obtain a bigger slice of the stagnant retirement fund industry pie. This has resulted in the industry rapidly moving towards a more integrated service model based on a one-stop investment service offering. If structured correctly, the model of an implemented one-stop offering approach should not be a concern as it can still be delivered with the necessary level of independence. It is, however, the way in which critical elements of the value chain is being devalued in the interest of gaining a competitive advantage that should have the alarm bells ringing. An increasing trend is one where retirement funds are being approached with the proposition of providing certain critical services such as investment administration and advisory services at “zero fees”. As if these critical elements are of a commodity based nature. Swimming naked There are, however, various risks related to a model based on cross subsidisation and a single minded focus by trustees and service providers on lower fees being paid for the services required by retirement funds. It fundamentally speaks to the ability or inability of trustees to properly perform their fiduciary duties and responsibilities over the long term. Unsustainable business models and non-transparent fee structures could result in retirement funds and their members being left severely exposed in time to come from a cyber-security, quality of advice and/or investment return perspective. If investment administration is provided at no cost one would be concerned about the future ability of the service provider to not only maintain but also to enhance the necessary human capital, system functionality, service levels and security service elements a retirement fund requires. Retirement fund administrators deal with the valuable personal details of members. Cyber security risk has become one of the top ranking concerns for the industry as per the latest industry surveys among trustees and employee benefit consultants. The only effective way to proactively manage this risk is to ensure that the necessary financial resources, insurance cover, human capital and technological resources are available in order for administrators to perform their function. If administration is viewed as an extra layer of cost rather than a safe house of sensitive member information a retirement fund can easily be exposed to the permanent loss of members’ capital. Not charging for investment advice raise the same questions about the ability of the investment advisor to attract the best experience and skills as well as best of breed advice tools and methodologies in order to maximise investment returns for members up to and during retirement. The retirement fund could possibly find a saving on the service fees of an asset consultant attractive in the short term. However, this would ignore the risk of a less effective life stage and pre or post default investment strategy being implemented by the fund. Due to a lack of the critical thinking required to manage the various risks the strategy could be found wanting during times of market stress. A dysfunctional investment strategy can easily override the annual fee savings on the investment advice element over time. The compounding effect of just a 0.5% per annum sacrifice in investment returns could make a material difference in the end result for members over a period of 20 to 30 years and into retirement. Increased transparency The retirement fund industry still has much work to do in becoming more transparent in terms of the various service fees being charged and who the real beneficiaries are. The new Asisa Retirement Savings Cost Disclosure Standard (RSC) that came into effect from March 1, 2019 will assist the participating employers of Umbrella Retirement Funds to get a better understanding of what their members are paying for when it comes to each service being provided. Cost components to be disclosed as per the RSC industry standard will include investment management charges, advice charges, administration charges and all other charges such as regulatory, compliance and governance fees. Belts and braces The King IV Code of governance principles as it relates to retirement funds speak to specific principles when it comes to the fiduciary duties of Boards of Trustees and Management Committees. This includes the responsibility to ensure that the Fund have access to the necessary skills and expertise to ensure that the objectives of the retirement fund and its members are met in a sustainable manner. This would include staying informed about regulatory changes, identifying potential operational and investment risks, responsible corporate citizenship, avoiding conflicts of interest, a well-designed investment strategy as well as ensuring operational efficiencies and effectiveness. The proper governance of retirement funds can never be traded off against a fixation on individual elements such as service provider fees and investment performance only. The weakest link The local retirement fund industry have various challenges to deal with. To address these challenges the value of each service element in the value chain needs to be recognised for the role it plays in delivering sustainable solutions for retirement funds and their members. Service fees should always be an important focus for the Board of Trustees or Management Committees of retirement funds to consider as part of their fiduciary duty towards all fund members. However, they should have a balanced approach when it comes to finding the most appropriate solution as the service provider value chain for a retirement fund is only as strong as the weakest link. In a race to the bottom to find the cheapest option the members of a retirement might ultimately only get what they paid for or “did not pay for”. A cyber risk event or a material oversight in the investment strategy of the fund could result in the permanent loss of capital or an opportunity loss in terms of investment returns for members. Paying an appropriate fee for the critical service elements should be viewed as an “insurance premium” to protect the fund against risks such as capital and potential opportunity losses. A more suitable approach would be for retirement funds to focus less on the price being paid and more on acquiring true value for money service offerings. This will result in a more secure, sustainable and quality retirement savings solution and will ensure that the ultimate goal of a better outcome for members is achieved. Johan Gouws is the head of Sasfin Institutional Consulting. The views and opinions shared in this article belong to their author, cannot be construed as financial advice, and do not necessarily mirror the views and opinions of Moneyweb.