Global manufacturing took another knock last month from trade tensions, adding to concerns that the world economy is weakening. The latest signs of factory weakness — in countries including South Korea, Germany and Japan — underscore the growing threat to the world economy posed by the escalating US-China trade war. The reports came amid a fresh warning from Wall Street about recession risks.  In the UK, where Brexit uncertainty is proving an additional burden, manufacturing shrank for the first time in almost three years in May. That’s partly due to pullback after huge stockpiling before March 29, when Britain was initially due to leave the European Union. Read: SA Absa PMI drops in May US President Donald Trump has also threatened Mexico with tariffs. On Sunday, China released a document blaming the US for a breakdown in trade talks and accusing it of unreasonable demands. Concern about the global outlook has fuelled a flight to safety, boosting demand for bonds and pushing stocks lower. Morgan Stanley has warned that investors continue to underestimate the situation. It sees a global recession within nine months if Trump imposes 25% tariffs on an additional $300 billion of Chinese exports and Beijing retaliates. European stocks declined on Monday, with the Stoxx Europe 600 Index down 0.6%, extending May’s 5.7% drop. German bonds rose, pushing the 10-year yield further below zero, to a record low -0.22%. “The last few weeks has undoubtedly unsettled investor confidence,” Julian Chillingworth, chief investment officer at Rathbones, said on Bloomberg Television. “The uncertainty that’s crept into investors’ thinking has occurred because of the unpredictability.”  In South Korea, the Purchasing Managers Index fell to 48.4 in from 50.2 in April, below the key 50 level. Survey respondents complained of poor sales to Japan and China, and noted slowdowns in the semiconductor and car industries. Weak demand for new cars is hitting automakers in Japan, Germany and elsewhere, with ripple effects being felt more widely. Italian tiremaker Pirelli last month cut its 2019 revenue growth forecast, saying it was taking a “more cautious view.” China’s official PMI for May slid to 49.4, and an employment index tumbled to the lowest level since the aftermath of the global financial crisis. The Caixin manufacturing PMI for May released Monday held at 50.2. “This adds to an increasingly challenging picture for Asia, after data last week showed China’s official PMI slipping back into contraction. The upshot: Policy easing is likely to broaden and accelerate. Capital outflows spurred by risk-off sentiment, though, could limit extent of rate cuts by central banks in emerging Asia.” –Bloomberg Asia economists The latest reading from Germany showed manufacturing in Europe’s largest economy remains in a slump. IHS Markit, which compiles the PMI, said euro-zone factory weakness is “entrenched,” with companies reporting falling demand both at home and abroad.