Here’s what caught our attention on Thursday: 1. The AG’s report on municipal spending The Auditor-General’s report on municipal expenditure shows that the state of local and district municipalities is bad and that things are only getting worse. The report, which was published and presented on Wednesday, indicated that only 8% of all South African municipalities received a clean audit report, which represents 3% of the total budget expenditure of R376.5 billion during the year, Moneyweb is reporting. The Free State, North West province and Limpopo were said to be in a critical state, while the Western Cape is home to the best managed municipalities. Read: From bad to worse 2. Growthpoint and Investec Africa JV to reveal first deal The joint-venture between Growthpoint and Investec Asset Management, dubbed Growthpoint Investec African Properties, which was announced over three years ago, has secured its first deal, although it is yet to be officially announced. Moneyweb is reporting that the JV has emerged as the suitor for AttAfrica’s retail properties in Ghana and Zambia. AttAfrica is jointly owned by JSE-listed Reits Hyprop and Attacq. Growthpoint told Moneyweb its target now is to raise around $600 million for investing in commercial properties in the rest of Africa. Read: Growthpoint-Investec African JV secures its first two deals 3. Steinhoff wants Jooste to pay up Steinhoff’s new management is holding former CEO, Markus Jooste chiefly responsible for the series of suspicious transactions and for inflating prices that resulted in the retailer’s near implosion. According to court papers seen by Bloomberg, Steinhoff is seeking R850 million in payments from Jooste and is also suing former CFO, Ben la Grange for about R271 million in the same case. Bloomberg is reporting that Steinhoff is looking to claw back base salaries, bonuses and other incentives paid to Jooste since 2009. Read: Steinhoff seeks R850m from ex-CEO after accounting crisis 4. May PPI South Africa’s producer price inflation slowed to 6.4% year-on-year in May from a 6.5% increase in April, the statistics agency said on Thursday. On a month-on-month basis, the PPI rose by 0.5% in May after increasing by 1.3% in the previous month, Statistics South Africa said. Prices slowed mainly for coke, petroleum, chemical, rubber & plastic products, metals, machinery & computer equipment and paper & printed products, data from Trading Economics shows. 5. Eskom’s restructuring timeline National Treasury director, Dondo Mogajane has set out a timeline for debt-laden Eskom’s restructuring process, during which, he says, creditors of the utility won’t suffer losses. Mogajane says Eskom’s bailout by government, as announced last week, would enable Eskom to function as a going concern for the next two years; a bill for the bailout will be approved by end of July and a chief restructuring officer will be announced in July. He also highlighted that Eskom will be unbundled in two years. Read: South Africa says Eskom creditors won’t lose out in restructure