Here’s what caught our attention on Tuesday: 1. A round-up of SA’s retrenchments South African industries are suffering job losses en masse, with the latest planned cuts being announced at diamond mining company, Alexkor. Moneyweb is reporting that so far this year, the mining and construction sectors have shed the most jobs with miners Impala Platinum and Sibanye-Stillwater announcing they are cutting about 5 000 positions between them, while the construction sector lost at least 20 000 jobs in the quarter ending December 2018. Other notable planned job cuts include Standard Bank (1 200), MultiChoice (2 194) and Tongaat Hulett (5 000). <a href="http://iono.fm/e/709709">Content hosted by iono.fm</a> South Africa’s quarterly labour force survey statistics for March 2019 are expected to be released on Tuesday. Read: SA’s jobs market gets tight 2. Denel employees won’t receive full salary Employees at state-arms manufacturer, Denel will not be receiving their full salaries in June as the company continues to face cash-flow issues. The news emerged after a member of Solidarity union met with Denel’s management on Monday. Reuters is reporting that employees will only receive 85% of their salaries, but the union is calling for answers on when workers will receive the remaining 15%. 3. Omnia results Chemicals manufacturing company, Omnia is reporting a headline loss per share amounting to 112 cents for the year ended March 31, 2019. Basic loss per share amounted to 609 cents and a loss before tax of R414 million was reported. Revenue increased by 7% to R18.62 billion and operating profit decreased by 98% to R24 million. The company attributes losses in its main divisions to exchange rate volatility, market and price pressures in its agricultural division, uncertainty around the Mining Charter in its mining division and a decrease in commodity prices and decline in demand in its chemicals division. 4. Zimbabwe bumps up lending rate to 50% Zimbabwe’s central bank has raised its overnight lending rate to 50% from 15%, to support its local currency which was declared the only form of legal tender on Monday. Zimbabwe named the RTGS dollar as its sole currency, no longer recognising the British pound, US dollar, rand, Botswana pula or any other foreign currency. This was done in an effort to curb black market currency trade. The central bank says it has also taken steps to put letters of credit in place to secure key imports, including fuel and wheat. Read: Zimbabwe hikes overnight lending rate to 50% 5. TymeBank announces changes to board Digital bank, TymeBank announced changes to its board and the resignation of its CEO on Tuesday. The company says Sandile Shabalala, who held the position of CEO for three years, tendered his resignation for personal reasons. The company added that it will announce the appointment of a new CEO in due course. Other changes to board include the appointment of Thabani Jali as independent non-executive director and chairperson, Tom Boardman as non-executive director and deputy chairperson and Phillip Wessels as independent non-executive director.