Education provider AdvTech’s share price is down since April 2018 despite a fairly decent set of financials for the half year to June. Private schooling competitor Curro’s share price is down about 60% over the same period. Stadio, the tertiary college portfolio unbundled from Curro in 2017, has seen its share price drop by two thirds since April 2018. All three are listed under general retailers, which is down 40% over the last year. The financial results from Curro and AdvTech don’t seem to justify a walloping of that size, so what’s going on here? “I think it is general sentiment around the retail sector,” says AdvTech CEO Roy Douglas. “If you look at our competitors such as Curro and Stadio, their share prices are also down significantly.” Parents under pressure Education has traditionally been seen as a defensive investment, as removing a child from school is often the last decision parents under financial stress will make. Douglas says the company will assist parents in financial difficulty, and this helps with student retention. “There is no doubt these are difficult times for many parents and we try as far as possible to come to arrangements with those in need. This has helped our student retentions.” AdvTech’s just-announced results for the six months to June 2019 show revenue up 15% to R2.5 billion and operating profit up 6% to R428 million. Cash generation from operations is impressive and has been growing at a 27% annual clip for the last four years. Source: AdvTech The portfolio includes Crawford Schools, Pinnacle, Trinityhouse and several smaller school brands, as well as a number of tertiary education institutions such as Monash, Varsity College, Rosebank College, Vega and six Capsicum chef schools. Growth in the African school market – notably Botswana and Kenya – has been impressive and opens up exciting future possibilities. The portfolio also includes the University of Africa in Zambia, which offers distance learning programmes up to PhD level. AdvTech is the leading provider in the premium private school sector where demand is strong. “However, the challenging South African socio-economic climate continues and our focus is to ensure that our brands offer value to our customers and we are investing in enhancing our academic offering, improving our focus on customers and driving operational efficiencies,” says its interim results announcement. New schools Two Pinnacle schools in the mid-fee sector have been repositioned, while the opening of Pinnacle colleges in Waterfall and Linden in Gauteng next year will boost AdvTech’s presence in this sector to 24 schools across nine campuses nationally. Earlier this year its subsidiary Independent Institute of Education (IIE) acquired Monash South Africa, offering university-level education and boosting its tertiary student complement to more than 43 000. The tertiary division is showing good growth and is now the largest private university in SA. This division grew both revenue and operating profit by 20% to R1 billion and R245 million respectively. IIE now offers 220 courses and plans are in place to open two new Rosebank College Campuses in Cape Town and Port Elizabeth in 2020, while expanding at several Varsity College campuses to meet growing demand. Recruitment less robust On the recruitment side of the business, the news is less encouraging: placement volumes and operating profits declined, with the country experiencing reduced employer confidence and the highest levels of unemployment in about 15 years. The key numbers are: In an otherwise bleak economic environment, a ray of sunshine broke through the clouds this week with finance minister Tito Mboweni’s plan to reboot the economy. “The growth plan is encouraging, and highlights a number of areas of opportunity,” says Douglas. “It challenges the status quo and shows that a considerable amount of thought has gone into how to get SA on the growth path again. “We’ve had lots of plans and documents in the past, but they all suffered from poor execution and delivery. This is where we now need to put our attention.”