Locally-listed UK real estate investment trusts (Reits) have come under pressure on the JSE in the past few weeks. A weakening pound, concerns around Brexit and operational issues have weighed on the three biggest counters – Intu, Hammerson and Capital & Counties. Intu has been the worst affected, with its shares falling over 42% in just the last two weeks after releasing its half-year numbers on July 31. The company reported lower net rental income, and a sharp drop in cash flows from operating activities. It also announced that it would be disposing of its underperforming assets in Spain to reduce its debt and suspended its dividend to retain cash in the business. This saw the counter fall 30% in one day. A day earlier, Hammerson had reported a 12.3% drop in rental income in its interim results. It was unable to increase its dividend over 2018 as it too noted that it had to prioritise paying off debt. Capital & Counties delivered results a few days earlier that were more robust than its peers, but it too has been unable to escape the malaise. The counter is down more than 10% over the past 30 days. Source: ProfileData This has naturally impacted funds with large holdings in these shares. Some managers had built up large positions in these Reits because their valuations were looking attractive. However, the difficult UK environment has continued to push their prices lower. These counters were not, however, that widely held. As they all have primary listings in London, none of them are in the FTSE/JSE SA Listed Property Index (SAPY), which is the most widely used local listed property benchmark. According to the latest available figures from Morningstar, Intu is held by 158 unit trusts, exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and institutional portfolios. The share however makes up more than 1% of only 26 of these funds. Source: Morningstar One would expect these counters to be reasonably widely held in specialist property unit trusts. However, a number of funds with large exposures are either equity or multi-asset portfolios. The tables below show the 15 unit trusts and ETFs with the largest exposures to each of the three counters. Source: Morningstar Source: Morningstar Source: Morningstar It’s noticeable that a few funds are heavily exposed to more than one of these stocks. Some hold all three. This has materially hurt their short-term performance. The table below shows the funds that have large holdings in these UK Reits, together with their three-month performance figures. Source: ProfileData