Discovery Bank’s monthly account fees compare fairly favourably with those of its rivals, especially when one looks at the prices of its bundled offerings. Its bundled Gold account (technically the Discovery Gold Card and Transaction Account) has a monthly account fee of R90, the bundled Platinum account costs R135 per month, and the bundled Black account is priced at R325 per month. However, a separate Vitality Money premium is levied on the accounts which means their effective costs per month are higher. Whether Discovery separately charges for Vitality Money because of legal or compliance reasons is unknown. The entire proposition of Discovery Bank is premised on Vitality Money, which rewards clients for ‘banking healthier’ with dynamic interest rates on both savings and credit, as well as boosted Vitality discounts and cashback. Reward boosts for good behaviour Vitality Money behaviour will effectively ‘boost’ a customer’s core Vitality rewards discounts. For example, the up to 35% discount on local flights on partner airlines can be boosted to as much as 75%. On savings, rates of up to 6.5% per annum on so-called lazy balances and 7.5% per annum for demand savings can be achieved. On borrowings, up to prime less 1% can be achieved, depending on behaviour. Without Vitality Money, much of the proposition disappears and any of the three accounts arguably becomes just another bank account. A more accurate comparison would be to use the total price paid per month; the account fee plus the Vitality Money premium. For Gold, this means the effective (bundled) monthly price is R125, for Platinum it’s R180 and for Black it is R380. ‘Full banking suite’ options Black Platinum Gold Monthly account fee R325 R135 R90 Vitality Money premium R55 R45 R35 Total R380 R180 R125 Cash withdrawal at local ATM Unlimited 8 free 4 free Cash withdrawal at local POS Unlimited Unlimited Unlimited Cash withdrawal at international ATM Unlimited R65 R65 Debit orders Unlimited Unlimited Unlimited Payments Unlimited Unlimited Unlimited Real-time payments Unlimited R10 R10 Declined transactions Unlimited Unlimited Unlimited * A fair usage policy applies for so-called ‘Unlimited’ usage. ** Once bundled limits are reached for cash withdrawals at local ATMs on the Platinum and Gold accounts, a fee of R4.50 plus 1.5% of the amount withdrawn is charged. At first glance, transaction fees are simpler than those seen at many other banks. Much of this is due to the fact that Discovery Bank does not have a physical footprint, either through branches or ATMs. Discovery Bank has not yet disclosed a fee for cash deposits, and it is uncertain how this will even be possible given the absence of a physical footprint. It could, like Investec, reach an agreement with one of its rivals to use their ATM infrastructure for deposits. The banking suite products (effectively the bundled accounts) are, however, not the only ones on offer. Customers can have just a transactional account, where they pay either a flat monthly fee (which would include bundled transactions) or per transaction. Per transaction pricing is not dissimilar to rates on offer at other banks.  All accounts Cash withdrawal at local ATM R4.50 + 1.5% of withdrawal amount Cash withdrawal at local POS R2 Cash withdrawal at international ATM R65 Debit orders R3.75 Payments R2.50 Real-time payments R10 Customers can also choose to just have a credit card. This means the over 300 000 existing Discovery cardholders don’t necessarily need to move all their banking to Discovery. It also means that the bank’s pricing options are not quite as simple as they seem. Far from a proposition which seemed to offer just three different accounts, there are actually 12 different pricing options for the accounts and cards on offer.  Monthly account fee Discovery Black Card and transactional account R325 Discovery Black transactional account (one monthly fee) R250 Discovery Black transactional account (pay per transaction) R60 Discovery Black Card R110   Discovery Platinum Card and transactional account R325 Discovery Platinum transactional account (one monthly fee) R180 Discovery Platinum transactional account (pay per transaction) R30 Discovery Platinum Card R60   Discovery Gold Card and transactional account R325 Discovery Gold transactional account (one monthly fee) R105 Discovery Gold transactional account (pay per transaction) R5 Discovery Gold Card R30 There are no major differences between the transactional accounts, save for the number of free cash withdrawals at ATMs locally as well as the charges on Platinum and Gold accounts for real-time payments and international cash withdrawals. Black and Platinum accounts get automatic warranty extension of up to 24 months, as well as short-term protection against theft and accidental damage of purchases made with the debit card. The real differences are in the credit cards (and therefore the ‘full banking suite options’), where the dynamic discounts vary between the three. Cashback on … Black Platinum Gold Flights Up to 60% local and up to 50% international* – – HealthyFood Up to 75%** Up to 50% Up to 40% HealthyCare and HealthyGear Up to 50% Up to 50% – Shell and BP (fuel) Up to 15% Up to 15% Up to 10% Uber Up to 15% Up to 15% Up to 10% * Six free visits each year (for the cardholder and a guest) to more than 1 000 airport lounges globally also included. ** Special offer until September 30, after which the max will drop to 50%. The overly complicated fee structure, however, shows that the bank’s product designers (and actuaries?) have been suckered into trying to cater to every possible type of customer across its base. But customers are crying out for simplicity. Taken as a whole, its pricing is nearly every bit as complex as core account options at its more established rivals. If it needed to try and appease its existing credit card base, it could’ve simply offered three credit card-only options and the three full suite options (comprising the credit card and transactional account). How large would the market realistically be for only a Discovery Bank transactional account? Perhaps it will get to a simplified offering over time. Judging from most of its competitors, however, that’s highly unlikely. Hilton Tarrant works at YFM. He can still be contacted at hilton@moneyweb.co.za.