Former Bosasa CEO Gavin Watson’s contacts ran deep and wide; he ensnared high-ranking government officials, government departments, and others. So deep and enmeshed was he, it is probable he couldn’t extricate himself. Testimony given at the Commission of Inquiry into State Capture was not going to send him straight to jail (per Monopoly game rules), but was nonetheless very damning. Watson could have morphed into a man who stood tall and countered the allegations levelled at him. But now he may remembered as the victim of a plot. Or a coward who has buried the evidence. Or yet another reckless driver. Be that as it may, his evidence has dropped into the void. But it is unlikely it will make much difference. Read: Former Bosasa CEO linked to corruption allegations killed in car crash Bosasa’s former COO Angelo Agrizzi has alleged that Watson – together with the senior management of the Bosasa group of companies, senior government employees, politicians and others – were (and still are) involved in criminal activities involving money laundering, tender fraud, corruption and tax evasion over the past 20 years. The amount of money involved in these illegal activities probably amounts to billions of South African rands. Those involved in these corrupt practices received substantial cash and other gratuities. Bosasa is involved in so many businesses: catering, security, mesh fencing, casinos, you name it. From the evidence, one gets the idea that wherever there was a government tender, Bosasa wanted it; there was money to be made, and bribes to pay. Of course, Agrizzi’s evidence – and that of other testifiers in regard to Bosasa, the inter-connected companies, and Watson – could be fabricated, exaggerated or distorted. Or perhaps motivated by improper motives. Perhaps only certain parts are true or reliable. When Agrizzi asked Watson to start keeping records, Watson replied: “I do not use paper, I have been trained to use my memory, I do not write anything down, I have not signed anything and I don’t have a secretary.” Agrizzi alleged that he would accompany Watson to meetings, where he would witness Watson handing out money wrapped in bags to various officials. He saw Watson counting money at his desk, and giving it to the person sitting across him. Many times it was Agrizzi who was the delivery guy, handing over “the grey security bags filled with money” to certain people at OR Tambo International Airport to be paid to people within the airports company. Watson may have had a massive network, but he didn’t necessarily get involved in negotiating crooked deals. Why should he, when he had underlings to carry out his verbal instructions. Watson knew how to pay off officials. Braai packs, frozen chicken, cold drinks and groceries. And bags of cash. Part of Watson’s alleged modus operandi was to use his influence over union officials to create work stoppages in order to get companies to agree to various tender irregularities (submitting a tender after the deadline, altering the tender), with the tender then being awarded to Bosasa. However, Watson never anticipated being recorded on video. There are clips of Watson: Agrizzi also alleged: “One did not challenge Gavin Watson,” said Agrizzi. “You just do not challenge him”. The value of Agrizzi’s evidence, in the absence of any testimony by Watson, but corroborated by others, will still have to be decided by the commission. Stephanus Venter, Bosasa’s tax consultant, in an affidavit signed on December 19, 2017, alleged that Watson was guilty of tax fraud and provided details. Agrizzi confirmed many of these details. The South African Revenue Service (Sars) may have the easiest job: value all the assets in Watson’s estate, and compare the figure with income earned per annual tax return. If the assets appear to have been acquired with laundered money, surely Sars can confiscate these? No doubt Sars will shine its spotlight on his family and business associates as well. They should expect to be subjected to lifestyle audits. In his evidence, Agrizzi implicated many others who should be able to confirm – or deny – Watson’s involvement in criminal activities and tender irregularities. Unless, of course, they are also reckless drivers.