Investing is often not an art or a science but a total poke in the dark. Some tell you such and such fund did well, and others tell you about a stock that you must buy. Some insist that property is the way to go. Often even financial advisors have a limited view of the investment world. I have heard bright young things tell folk to invest in many a dud. They show a year or five-year history with a nice projection. They give classes on how to get rich or invest in bitcoin. My question is: have they done their homework and looked at the whole picture? One should not compare the returns of just one asset class as that would be a false measure. Are risks such as inflation considered? What about the tax impact on investments, and how do costs impact investing in certain assets classes? In this first article, we consider after-inflation returns only and leave out the impact of costs and taxes. Looking back Doing real investment homework requires considering returns over a longer period to include a few economic cycles that show us a more ‘normal’ picture –  one that is not distorted by a year or two of exceptional performance. There was the US asset manager ironically called Long Term Capital Management, which bet the house and lost on data that spanned only 10 years. Below are the after-tax returns of investable asset classes available to South Africans and reported on as investable over this time period. As few assumptions as possible (actually just rental income) are made in the tables, and the results are very interesting. They should be required reading for every investor. After-inflation returns for South African assets Number of years Total gross return JSE SA bonds real yield 91-day money market yield Total gross house return Gold in rand Last 50 years 3.94 2.08 0.75 1.05 4.61 Last 25 years 4.80 3.93 2.72 3.49 4.76 Last 15 years 6.03 2.49 1.05 1.43 7.42 Last 12 years -0.04 2.44 0.63 -1.84 3.88 Last 10 years 4.31 3.17 0.85 -0.15 1.60 Last 5 years -3.41 3.88 1.51 -0.15 1.88 Last 3 years -2.14 4.30 1.83 -0.79 -4.62 Last 1 year -4.07 4.63 2.00 -0.77 -6.47 Source: SA Reserve Bank, Bank of International Settlements, Stats SA, New York gold price at end of period Note: All share indices as reported on in periods as displayed in the SA Reserve Bank quarterly bulletin at the time. Yield for bonds are 10 years and over government bonds in SA, and represent yields to maturity. Total house returns are the real SA house prices as recorded by the Bank of International Settlements. Rental returns are assumed at less than 8% a year before costs such as rental agent fee and property taxes. We do however allow for residential houses standing empty and some maintenance. Inflation used is the headline inflation index average for each year. All investments and returns are in rand. Dividends reinvested, as are rents. Gold carries no interest here. There are no investment costs or taxes involved here (more on this at a later stage). In the long run, all that glitters is gold The most surprising result is that over the 50-year period, since 1969, gold in rand terms has maintained its value best. This is partly owed to the rand being fixed early in the period and once the rand floated a little, the impact of the currency was powerful. Gold in dollar terms increased from $35.45 in 1969 to $1 282.4 per ounce in 2018. This represents a 7.6% compounded nominal dollar return. Of course, once translated into rands, the nominal annual returns shoot up to 14.2% compounded for 50 years. Once you allow for inflation in SA, the return drops to 4.6% per year. But gold shines compared to all other asset classes over this 50-year period, and has been largely ignored by asset managers in recent years. Moreover, some other commodity assets also returned reasonably positive rates over the last 50 years according to The Economist’s all-items commodity price index. Gold was however the worst performer over the shorter term by a country mile. It is, however, not on the investment horizon for most of the time. As an aside, the nominal returns would have been 10.53, which beats SA house prices and fixed interest rates and was very close to bond returns (although this view changes after tax). Over the last 50 years, the JSE also performed far better than inflation and returned nearly 4% per year compounded. In nominal terms, the JSE returned 13.47% per annum. In fact, no investment class had negative returns over 50 years in SA in real terms. As can be seen in the table above, the after-inflation returns are also all positive over 25 years. Risk factors The risk factors, however, are not only inflation but things like taxes, longevity, costs, liquidity and the risk of failure. These other factors may not be fully quantifiable but I would guess that the JSE should return at least 2% more than government bonds, which are considered the safest investment. However, in the last 12 years the JSE and house price total returns turned negative albeit just slightly for the local stock exchange. Once again gold shines and, while one hears little of the yellow metal, as a hedge against inflation it has done its job well. Over the last three and five years as well as between 2017 and 2018, South African long bonds have performed best. Returns were between 3.9% and 4.6% compounded after inflation. Source: Economists.co.za Fixed investment accounts at 91 days fixed also had positive returns. However, the JSE lost value after inflation for all three shorter periods. This is somewhat expected in a low growth economy. Today, the JSE makes much of its income offshore and this shows that something else is wrong. Perhaps sentiment, or perhaps our corporates have not been as successful as hoped, or the JSE has run ahead of itself. Gold also lost value in real terms over the short term. Cash and bonds seem reasonable investments in the short term while the riskier assets are not good at showing short-term returns much of the time. Total house returns have fared badly over the last 12 years in SA. According to market analysis, the higher the house price the poorer the return as most South Africans are looking for lower-priced houses and rentals. South African returns by asset class are interesting in that they reveal something about SA. Assets that reflect the real economy such as houses and stocks are impacted by slower growth, corruption and low confidence. Financial assets that are more reflective of weaker government (i.e. higher yields) or independence of the central banks (bank deposits) have performed reasonably in the last few years. Of course, all may change but it does seem that SA assets do not offer the best investments for South Africa’s longer-term investors.