Illusionists trick us into thinking they are capable of impossible feats, usually for entertainment value. But we have our own tricksters – the political elite, who evidently believe that serving the public somehow bestows the power of magicians upon them. Irresponsible in their actions and speeches, they subscribe to the belief that the rulebook does not apply to them. Across all political parties, these illusionists have become power-seeking lords of misrule rather than leaders who are supposed to serve in the building of a better economy that uplifts its people. In the last two months, they have worked hard to show us that their primary concern is themselves, not the law or the economy or tackling entrenched structural challenges and providing a functioning government. Our former president’s blankness during testimony at the state capture commission of inquiry about his years in office is indicative of a man determined to absolve himself from taking responsibility for what transpired during his presidency. Currying favour This former president is determined to avoid being held accountable for entrenching endemic corruption and sycophantic tendencies in the currying of favour in ‘business’ dealings relating to state matters. And then there’s the ‘new dawn’ of the President Cyril Ramaphosa-led ANC that has held summits and lekgotlas, and has gone on investment drives. There’s also the hot-and-cold coalition between the DA and the EFF, and the unsurprising revelations of meetings between enemies who became united in the quest to remove Zuma. They are all part of the recurring self-delusions of politicians who think they are going to be in charge for a long time. In the last six months, politicians have shown that they are determined to help bring a calamitous socio-economic condition and politically unstable future to South Africa. Be it at a national, provincial and even party political level, they have displayed an unwillingness to solve problems besieging the country. Consider that in the Western Cape, a provincial government deems gang-related crimes and violence a problem they cannot solve. How else do you justify intervention by the national government? Is this not an indication of renouncing responsibility because such a problem can’t be the provincial government’s problem? After all, a hands-on approach would mean leaving their offices and going down there, to the community, to engage with the people. They want the keys to the bank … On the other hand, consider the recklessness of playing catch with ideas that can have lasting damage on the economy and thwart any chance of recovery. You will recall the ruling party’s resolve in its last congress to nationalise the country’s Reserve Bank. The party’s language on the matter was ambiguous, but talks about ownership of the bank continue to dominate discussions within the party. Is this not a signal of economic nationalism as way out of the economic crisis? A potential sign of a party dominated by populist policies based on ideology that failed the once-socialist states. Tellingly, it reveals the short-sightedness of politicians and their inability to think globally. One word will help understand this – Brexit. Whether it ends well or not, the instability it has caused in Britain and Europe has already been costly and will continue to be so for years to come. In any event, economic nationalism will not stop the effects of globalisation. Our politicians and their politics seem determined to take the country down with them into the abyss of obscurity because heaven forbid they as individuals be held accountable for the declining socio-economic conditions of ordinary citizens. Petty politics In Gauteng political parties are playing petty politics while the province faces urgent issues such as slowing growth, an increasing urban population without infrastructure, and a housing shortage. The province’s public health sector has a severe shortage of nurses and doctors to deal with the increased demand. Much of what is happening today in South Africa is a consequence of the political class united in its disunity to avoid accountability while absolving themselves of the responsibility of leading the country out of its economic and social crisis. The unrest in communities countrywide, the total disregard for authority displayed by African immigrants recently in the Joburg CBD and the boldness of gangs wars in the Western Cape is driven by the conscious shift in society. It is a move away from a responsible and accountable citizenry to one based on mimicking the attitudes and behaviour of political leaders. To be surprised by the worsening national social relations would be to reveal ourselves as ignorant or amnesiac of the reality. Is it not the politicians who have fuel discord – racially, socially and politically? South Africans are divided because politicians are dividing them. Why should the ordinary citizen care about standards and decency and doing the right then when their leaders have disregard for the rulebook? Politicians are putting the country in danger due to greed, corruption, the lack of long-term strategic thinking about government, and their determination to not hold each other accountable. Are they are blind to the unintended yet very probable monster they are creating for the subsequent generation. Are there leaders who can get us out of this self-made trap?