Following on from the success of the film streaming business model, the meteoric rise of cloud-based video game streaming has breathed new life into the gaming industry, uncovering a wealth of opportunities for investors with a taste for tech. Increasingly sophisticated product offerings have seen millennials progressively choosing gaming over mall trips and movies for entertainment. But, contrary to stereotypical perceptions of gaming as an anti-social activity carried out in dark rooms or dingy arcades, online gaming has become something of a social and cultural phenomenon. Recent advancements in internet speed, which improved by 23% between 2017 and 2018 alone, means that gamers are now able to join global communities of like-minded individuals and friends, and engage in a vivid battle royale with players around the world from the comfort of their own home – all without experiencing any package losses or delays. As an added benefit, gamers can simultaneously chat with each other in real-time, sharing a rewarding digital experience without any of the awkward silences and pauses that characterised early Skype conversations. And it is this very networking effect that continuously attracts new users, driving rapid uptake and market growth. According to market research company Newzoo, there were as many as 2.2 billion active gamers at the end of 2018, and this number is expected to grow to around 2.4 billion by the end of this year. Additionally, growing emphasis on games optimised for mobile devices rather than traditional gaming consoles has attracted new audiences across multiple generations, who are drawn to the convenience of playing while completing daily activities such as travelling, waiting in reception areas or queuing. Thus, while video game console sales have steadily dropped over the past ten years, the global market value of the cloud gaming industry soared by 46% between 2017 and 2018 alone, climbing from $45 million to $66 million within twelve months. And according to some market estimates, this figure could reach as much as $450 million by 2023.   So where to start? The biggest risk of investing in gaming companies is that revenues are often dependent on one or two popular titles, or on the release of new titles, as rapidly changing technology means that games can quickly become obsolete. Investors should therefore rather consider larger companies whose revenues are diversified across several titles. Within this space, Activision Blizzard (ATVI) and Nintendo emerge as strong contenders for further consideration, with healthy balance sheets, well-established gaming franchises and strong prospects. Activision blizzard ATVI, home of the popular Call of Duty series, sells 75% of its content digitally, and boasts nearly 500 million active monthly users across 196 countries. The company already employs some 9 000 individuals, and in February it announced plans to grow its development team by some 20% over the course of 2019 in order to speed up the release of games and updates. The company currently has five key divisions, namely: ATVI’s stock came under some pressure earlier this year following the announcement that it would be ending its partnership with Destiny developer Bungie (which acquired full publishing rights to the hit game), as well as over fears regarding strong competition from Epic Games’ Fortnite. The company has also seen some churn in leadership, with the departure of two chief financial officers over the past year. However, with a market cap of $36 billion, ATVI remains a formidable player and market leader in the industry, with a long track record of successful titles and IP, and capable leadership in the form of experienced chief executive officer Bobby Kotick. And while revenues are somewhat volatile owing to the release of games in certain years and updates in others, the company’s profit margins are high and stable, and are expected to remain so. ATVI’s return on equity (ROE) stands at 16.4%, with a dividend yield of 0.8% and a price-earnings ratio (non-GAAP) of 17.4 on a trailing 12-month basis. Nintendo From somewhat humble origins as a playing cards manufacturer, gaming giant Nintendo is now a globally recognised household name, with an impressive history spanning some 140 years. The company manufactures software, such as the Super Mario Bros franchise, and gaming consoles such as the Wii and Nintendo Switch devices, which  have received a particularly welcome boost over the past few years owing to China’s 2015 decision to lift the ban on the sale of gaming consoles. Source: Cannon Asset Managers (2019) Much like ATVI, Nintendo also experiences cyclical earnings related to game releases. However, two major game releases set for 2019 should not only drive revenue in their own right but are also expected to grow further demand for Nintendo Switch devices. These include the launch of Super Mario Maker 2 which hit shelves just a few weeks ago, and the eagerly anticipated Pokémon: Sword and Shield game due in November. Nintendo has a market cap of some $50.1 billion and boasts a strong track record with a diverse array of hit gaming franchises, with a ROE of 14.2%, dividend yield of 2.2% and price-earnings multiple of 18.4 adjusted for cash. Source: Cannon Asset Managers (2019) Wessel Joubert is an investment associate at Cannon Asset Managers. The views and opinions shared in this article belong to their author, cannot be construed as financial advice, and do not necessarily mirror the views and opinions of Moneyweb.