With Massmart’s profitability historically “heavily skewed towards the second half of the financial year”, the JSE-listed retail and wholesale giant will be hoping for stronger trade in the remaining months of 2019 to avoid an ‘annus horribilis’. The majority Walmart-owned retailer officially reported its first loss in 20 years on Thursday, coming in at R796.6 million for the year to June 30. This includes the impact of new International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) 16 accounting rules that came into effect this year. Massmart’s headline loss per share of 364.7 cents saw no dividend declared by the group for the interim period. Retail analysts have warned that 2019 will be ‘horrible year’ for Massmart if new CEO Mitch Slape doesn’t manage to pull off a massive turnaround in the second half. The Walmart retail veteran formally takes over from Guy Hayward on September 1, but both were at Massmart’s interim results presentation in Johannesburg on Thursday. Read: Massmart looks to new CEO to beat slump Hayward, who has been with Massmart for two decades and resigned in May, delivered his swansong results presentation describing the first half of the year as a “brutal trading environment” for the group. “The second quarter of 2019 was particularly brutal,” he said. “We expected it to be better due to the Easter holidays being in April this year, but that was not the case. It shows how tough things are in the SA economy and for consumers. “Our interim financial results make for tough reading, with this being the group’s first loss in 20 years.” Independent retail analyst Chris Gilmour, speaking to Moneyweb on the sidelines of the presentation, said all indications are that “2019 will be a really horrible year” for the group. “Mitch Slape will throw everything including the kitchen sink at the problem in respects of cutting costs, but 2019 will still be a write-off,” he says. “Maybe next year will be a lot better and if so, investors may start nibbling now. “This is a shocking set of results. I did not realise how bad things are … ” says Gilmour. “Massmart’s Cambridge Food business is a loss maker despite it targeting the lower end of the market, which is still spending on food,” adds Gilmour. “This gives an indication that Massmart’s woes are not only related to SA’s tough economic environment.” Read: Massmart in need of an ‘Edcon-like’ overhaul? Gilmour says that besides Massmart’s embattled Game chain, DionWired is also a big concern. “The group seems to have lost its way and is not focused enough. Massmart has mentioned on numerous occasions that it is one of the lowest operating cost businesses in SA’s retail sector. I wonder where it is going to cut costs to make a turnaround to profit.” The loss-makers Massmart reported total sales of R43.8 billion for the half-year from its four divisions, which include 441 stores in South Africa and 12 other countries in sub-Saharan Africa. Two formerly Durban-headquartered divisions – Massdiscounters (which houses Game and Dion) and Masscash (Jumbo Wholesale and Cambridge Food) – were the biggest loss-makers. Massdiscounters reported a trading loss of R396 million, while Masscash’s loss came in at R190 million. Masswarehouse, which houses Makro stores, was the highest grossing division with a trading profit of R336 million. The Massbuild division, which houses its Builders chain, saw a trading profit of R250 million. However, trading profit was also down in these divisions compared with the same period in 2018. Source: Massmart While Massmart reported sales growth for the period of 5.5%, this was offset by product inflation of 2.7% and an increase in group expenses of 11.8%. Employment costs, the group’s biggest cost category, increased 8.6% following the conversion of temporary workers to permanent employees. The group says this resulted in an 8% increase in its total staff complement to just over 46 500 people. Administered prices delivered a further blow Hayward says Massmart had to convert temporary workers to permanent employees in line with legislative requirements. “Besides the increase in employee costs, increased municipal tariffs and electricity costs as well as load shedding in the first quarter of the year resulted in an 8.7% increase in store occupancy costs.” Meanwhile, other operating costs increased by 19.3%. This included IT costs related to the roll-out of SAP’s Hybris omnichannel content management software. Hayward told Moneyweb that while there were no cost overruns in the roll-out, implementation delays affected some of its online sales. Speaking briefly at the presentation, Slape said he has come to South Africa with a “mandate from Walmart to build the strongest retailer in Africa”. He thanked Hayward for his contribution to the company and stressed Walmart’s commitment to growing the business in SA and on the continent. Slape said that while he was looking forward to engaging with Massmart staff and gaining a better view of the business, his immediate priority is to deliver on its forecast for the full year. Barring any “further deterioration of the South African economy for the remainer of 2019”, Massmart says it expects that basic earnings per share for the full year could be “at least 50% below last year”. This excludes any impact from IFRS 16. For its 2018 full year Massmart’s basic earnings per share came in at 410.6 cents on a comparable basis. Massmart’s share price was up almost 8% at the close of the market on Thursday – but at R42.69 a share the stock is at a 13-year low. It has lost almost 60% of its value since the start of the year. 