Moneyweb is one of the top destinations for business, finance and investment news in South Africa. The brand delivers premium content and tools to the investment community. The following positions have become available within the company:   Moneyweb is looking to appoint a senior reporter to join its team of writers in Johannesburg. The position is senior level and the individual will be reporting to the publication’s editor. Position overview We’re looking for a person with a track record of excellent business and investment writing and analysis. The candidate must have a good grasp of the South African business environment, as well as of the global context. They need to have an understanding of the principles of economics, knowledge of stocks listed on the JSE, an understanding of the relationships between different financial instruments, and be able to interpret companies’ financial statements. They must have a good idea of what makes a good story and be able to generate good story ideas in discussion with the editorial team. Main responsibilities Minimum qualifications and requirements Salary is negotiable. Must have own transport. How to apply Applicants must send a CV and cover letter (no more than 500 words) outlining how they meet the specific requirements of the position to editor@moneyweb.co.za. Closing date for applications: August 15, 2019, at 17h00
Subject reference: Financial reporter   Moneyweb is looking to appoint an individual to manage the editorial production process for the website. This person will be responsible for ensuring that the process is efficient and that all content published on the website is accurate and in line with the publication’s tone and editorial focus. Position overview We’re looking for a highly organised and energetic individual with a meticulous eye. This person must be able to multi-task and copy edit on the fly without compromising quality. This person will be responsible for ensuring that the rest of the production team works in an efficient manner so that the website is updated regularly with relevant content, is without errors and appeals to readers. This individual will work closely with Moneyweb’s deputy editor to manage copy flow, which means liaising and interacting with both internal and external journalists. The position is Johannesburg-based and available from September 1. Main responsibilities Minimum qualifications and requirements Salary is negotiable. Must have own transport. How to apply Applicants must send a CV and cover letter (no more than 500 words) outlining how they meet the specific requirements of the position to editor@moneyweb.co.za. Closing date for applications: August 15, 2019, at 17h00
Subject reference: Production editor   Moneyweb is looking for a marketing manager to join its current team in Johannesburg. This person will be responsible for the marketing of Moneyweb content and products to existing and new audiences. Position overview The Moneyweb marketing manager will be responsible for implementing marketing functions for Moneyweb and implement agreed marketing strategies of the brand into current audience and to expand the brand into untapped markets. Main responsibilities The following skills are required: Salary is negotiable. Must have own transport. How to apply: Applicants must send a CV and cover letter (no more than 500 words) outlining how they meet the specific requirements of the position to mosehla@moneyweb.co.za. Closing date for applications: August 15, 2019, at 17h00
Subject reference: Marketing manager Moneyweb is an Equal Opportunity Employer. The appointment will be made in line with Moneyweb’s Employment Equity Plan and Policy. Applicants not contacted within 14 days after the closing date should consider their applications unsuccessful.