In the last few months, three new banks have emerged, promising to shake the SA banking scene out of its lethargy. Bank Zero, Discovery Bank and TymeBank are all digital banks that, free from the legacy costs associated with traditional banks, can offer cheaper and apparently more innovative services. Just how much market share they will take from the traditional banks is the subject of much speculation. Of the traditional banks, the newest, Capitec looks well positioned to compete against these emerging rivals as it migrates its clients from the branch to digital and self-help platforms. “Of our 11.8 million clients, 6.6 million are branch users and 5.2 million are digital,” said Capitec CEO Gerrie Fourie at the presentation of the group’s annual results for the year to February 28th 2019. But, of the digital users, 4.1 million rely on USSD [text based messaging] rather than Capitec’s banking app. “A smartphone driven service will not work for all customers. We believe the bank of the future needs a strong digital presence, an efficient branch network and regular client communications that add value.” Which is why Capitec is bucking the trend to reduce branch infrastructure. It increased its branch network by 14 branches to 840 in the last year. These are small ‘mini’ branches, unlike those of its traditional competitors. Amazon is investing in physical stores, Fourie says. “Sometimes people like personal interaction.”  The beauty is that as Capitec clients migrate to digital platforms so transaction banking is removed from the branch, freeing consultants to educate and cross-sell other products. The benefit was apparent in the sale of funeral policies, which were introduced in May 2018. The bank sold 500 000 policies, of which 360 000 remain active.  “80% of these policies are sold via the branch”, says Fourie. “This shows the power of a branch network in a South African context.” This push towards digital transactions saw the company increase its investment in IT infrastructure, digital development and data and analytics. Capitec reported headline earnings up by 19% to R5.3 billion, driven by strong client growth, the move to digital banking and a solid credit performance. “Our active client base grew 15.3% to 11.2 million,” says Fourie. “This signals trust and an acceptance of the brand. However, while 70% of new clients are under the age of 35, which is ideal, just 5.2 million clients deposit a salary. We need to persuade the other 6 million to bank with us.” That said, retail deposits continued to climb steadily, reaching R71 billion, up from R24 billion in 2014 and R58 billion in 2018. Banking costs lowered The movement of clients from in-branch transacting to digital or in-branch self-help terminals signalled a “massive shift” in user behaviour, says Fourie. For the consumer, it meant lower costs. Capitec took the unusual step of lowering its transaction banking fees on the digital platform and has passed R360 million in transaction savings on to its clients. “By lowering our pricing on transaction fees we are making certain we have long term relationships with our clients,” Fourie says. At the same time, it has increased the cost of cash withdrawals over R1000 in a blunt attempt to move clients away from cash. While Capitec’s transaction revenues grew ahead of the market at 26% (to R6.4 billion), this was below analyst expectations, which were closer to 30%. “Capitec is deliberately moving its clients to a low-cost channel, so cannibalising its own revenue,” says Mpande Maneli, a portfolio manager at Argon Asset Management. “The consequence is that transaction revenue covers 85% of operating costs and not 100% as was planned.” On the plus side, Capitec is supplementing its ‘non-interest income’ with the sale of funeral policies. “This product is in its infancy but has all the signs of becoming a great asset. This is also defensive revenue which when combined with transaction revenue, should ideally cover all operating costs,” she adds. “The delay doesn’t mean it won’t happen. It will just take another year or so to get there.” On the credit side, the business held its own in a lacklustre economy and increased credit risk-taking in the unsecured credit market. Capitec’s credit optimisation strategies resulted in a decrease in the shorter term credit products and an increase in longer-term loans. The bank, however, grew and optimised its book through a focus on client quality, protecting the book from clients prone to go under debt review. Capitec is also focused on driving the price of unsecured lending lower. Those clients with positive credit behaviour receive better interest rates; on average 17.5% and in the best case as low as 12.9%. Capitec is averaging 14 000 new credit card clients per month. At year-end the gross credit card book was R3.6 billion, which is roughly 3% of the total South African retail credit card market. Credit cards represent 26% of all new Capitec credit. No free lunch Returning to the subject of new digital entrants to the banking space, Fourie noted that they bring with them the perception of ‘free banking’, which is a misnomer. “Banking is about trust – regulation, compliance and security. It can’t be free. If it is then the bank is either making money off partners or it is offering zero interest to clients on deposit accounts, while earning 7% off those deposits in the money market. Our approach is to focus on the branch, digitisation, and a rich client experience.” The share price ended the day up 3.86% at R1340. 