South Africa’s political parties have entered full campaign mode ahead of the May 8 elections. Parliament is now finished for its term, only likely to restart at the end of May. With a PR system for voting, each leader has to visit hugely diverse areas, crisscrossing the country to garner every vote. There are no safe or marginal areas that can be ignored. The Zondo Commission of Inquiry continues in the coming week and will turn to more interesting issues around how former president Jacob Zuma came to power and how his presidency functioned in its early years. The commission is coming under criticism for offering grandstanding opportunities while perpetrators of state capture get a free pass with no one compelled to appear yet. It is still unclear yet if President Cyril Ramaphosa will appear in the coming weeks to offer a more formal apology for state capture pre-elections. Eskom remains the key focus. An update on load shedding is not expected until the week after this. The coming week should see only low stages of loadshedding and possibly only at the end of the week. Eskom has recharged pump storage and will be receiving more diesel to burn (at great cost) from Monday for OCGT usage. Eskom forecasts a 1GW excess of available capacity over demand in the coming week and so it will come down to luck and trips that could see the system pushed over the edge. Eskom forecasts however that a much tighter margin of only 600MW will occur the week after this and so there is a much higher risk of loadshedding then. The two key events in the coming week will be: The SA Reserve Bank’s MPC will announce its decision on rates this Thursday. Intellidex sees rates unchanged at 6.75%. While it is consensus that rates will be unchanged, the event represents for a likely flip flop back towards a more hawkish stance and will be closely watched for shifts in forecasts and tone. The November meeting in which rates were hiked was the final hurrah of a long lead up of increasing MPC concern and hawkishness, then flipped to neutral at the January meeting as the currency strengthened and inflation risks abated. Now, however, with a weaker currency again and higher oil and electricity prices, and slightly higher Sarb expectations, Intellidex expects a move back to (soft) hawkishness. In particular, the MPC will use the opportunity to show that the crisis at Eskom is a risk premia and shows the lack of space for cuts as opposed to being a growth shock event to be supported with lower rates. The key message will be that load shedding affects potential growth as much as current growth as so the output gap doesn’t change and hence QPM does not send a cut signal from load shedding impact. Given the Sarb was on the money with its 0.7% 2018 GDP forecast, 2019 will only fall marginally on the slowdown in high frequency data momentum into new year, and 2020 might fall by a pip but they keep 2021 unchanged to avoid signalling that long-term potential is falling. For the inflation forecast, some small moves could occur on recent food price volatility and shifts in oil and ZAR and electricity prices meaning that mainly 2020 might fall slightly while 2021 remains unchanged. It is interesting to note that a majority of the MPC members are on the ratings insider list and will be told the ratings opinion of Moody’s on Wednesday night before they take a decision on the rates on Thursday morning. Overall, Intellidex sees a risk of a year-end hike on any ratings outlook shift combined with a worse medium-term budget policy statement outcome and more risk premia needed on this front. However, we see the MPC in fiddling mode overall and will be reactive as the situation changes and not looking for any real structural shift from their current stance on the soft side of neutral. Cuts are possible only under specific circumstances – such as if long run forecast skew shifts markedly to the downside and CPI risks only converging to the target from the bottom side over time – which is very hard to see either in reality or hard to see the staff seeing and forecasting either. A cut could also be possible if there is a meaningful reduction in risk premia that stems say from ratings risks shifting to that of hikes. It’s clear that we are not in this situation. Moody’s Ratings agency Moody’s will announce its outlook for SA on Friday. Intellidex sees no cut in the rating or change in outlook, and possible even no announcement at all. Moody’s has, however, updated its forecasts and quantitative scorecard rating of South Africa internally in recent weeks. As such, it may decide to only release a research report (if that) and not a credit opinion. Such a move would be a huge disappointment to the market. Intellidex is if the opinion that Moody’s will revise deficit numbers wider and growth numbers slightly lower but still with a strong mean-reversion in both. Moody’s is still anchored with an unjustified optimism about long-term growth. This comes, in part, from the way it takes long-term growth expectations (to be an average of the past 4 years). This average is slowly falling over time but not significantly enough to force a major shift in their quantitative scorecard at this time in our view – and so not onwards into fiscal and debt views. Overall, however, we think there is still an excess of trust at Moody’s in taking what government presents to it at face value without critical appraisal. It’s important to note that while there is a chance of a ratings outlook cut – it is virtually impossible for a ratings committee in our view to undertake an outlook cut when the lead analyst has not recommended it given the requirements for audit and research trail to undertake such a decision. In sum, we see a strong possibility that nothing will come out of Moody’s next Friday or just a research report, with a ratings outlook cut to negative possible but less likely and a cut to the rating or a ratings watch of imminent downgrade both very unlikely. Peter Attard Montalto is head of Capital Markets Research at Intellidex.