Money, in and of itself, is not important. It’s what you can do with it that matters. Yet what is it that most financial advisors want to talk about? Your money – or the life that your money enables? Unfortunately, the term financial advice has become so overused and misused that it’s difficult to even be sure what it means. What, to put it another way, is the point of a financial advisor? For many people, the first part in answering this question stems from why they look for one in the first place. As former certified financial planner (CFP) and founder of The Financial Caddie Brian Foster notes, it is usually because something significant changes in a person’s life. “I don’t think anybody wakes up and suddenly decides to buy a financial plan,” he says. “There is usually a pain point of some description – an event that triggers the decision to talk to a financial advisor.” Seeking help This could be any number of things – a life event like a divorce, an inheritance, the death of a family member or a fall in the stock market. Whatever it is, however, it raises the sense that you need some help. So where do you look for it? Most often, people ask for a recommendation from their friends or family, but this is hardly optimal. “Most referrals are done on the basis that someone knows someone who sounds confident, who appears to know what they are talking about, is regulated, and is maybe even a CFP,” Foster points out. “But, actually, that still doesn’t tell you who you are talking to.” In reality, the term ‘financial advisor’ covers a range of people, from brokers selling insurance products to what Foster terms ‘lifestyle financial planners’. And the type of conversation you are going to have can differ substantially from one to the next. The stages of financial planning “Brokers are going to be talking about protection and risk policies,” says Foster. “They are going to be talking about insurance.” Then there are investment advisors who will talk about investments, the markets and which funds to select. “Their objective is to gather assets,” Foster explains. “They will try to persuade you to move your money under their care.” Financial planners might do both of these things. “They might talk about investments and risk, and will likely take the conversation to focus on building a comprehensive financial plan,” says Foster. “And that’s not wrong.” The lifestyle financial planner, however, is fundamentally different to these other three. “If you are talking to a lifestyle financial planner, they are probably more interested in who you are and what’s going on in your life,” says Foster. “Their skill is to be able to create a safe place to ask deeper questions in a way that isn’t manipulative, and which gets you to think about the things that are really important to you. My sense is that most people would like to have that conversation, but they don’t know how to have it.” What is the advisor asking you about? This is an approach, in other words, that doesn’t foreground your money, but rather what you intend to do with it. “It’s very difficult to separate someone’s money from their life,” says Foster. “How do financial advisors just have a conversation about life insurance products or investments returns without understanding their clients’ lives, who they are, and what they want to do?” If that is the conversation you want to have with your financial advisor, then you should pay close attention to the questions they are asking you. Are they genuinely curious about your life? Foster believes there is a pattern these questions should follow. It starts with where you currently are in your life, how you got here, and the challenges you are currently facing. It then moves to what would be a good outcome in addressing them. “A great question any financial planner should then ask is ‘where do you think can I add value?’,” says Foster. “That should lead to a much deeper discussion. If the client perceives that the planner can add value by telling them whether the stock market is going to go up or down, that gives an insight into what the client is thinking about, but it should also be a trigger for the planner to say: ‘I’m not able to do that. I can’t tell you. But let’s explore why you are feeling uncomfortable about this.’” For the conversation to reach this level, however, the planner has to be willing to go beyond a transactional discussion that has a financial product as the solution to every problem. This means the planner’s first priority should not be to talk, but to ask better questions and listen – to really learn about their client. “Is the advisor really interested?” Foster says. “If you’ve just given them the answers to a set of planned questions, do they really know anything about you? If we are going to have the kind of conversations that I think clients really enjoy, we have to get past that point. “My experience is that when those conversations do take place, planners are able to deliver significantly greater value, and they build better relationships with people who are much more engaged in their planning process.”