Political debate in South Africa – think of all the noise and drama coming from the state capture commission of inquiry – is about the future of the country and holding those of slippery words and action to account. Ideally, we want to see the law and courts set an example and deter such brazen selling-off of the country. It’s about the economy and how to bring it back after years of a loss, including the strainer effect of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) that runs to billions. SA’s annual economic growth has been below 2% since 2014, which is unbalanced and unsustainable. More alarming, however, is our youth unemployment rate – 53.8% among the 15-24 age group in 2018, according to World Bank data. There are risks that are born out of young people not having opportunities to enable their upward mobility, and help them move away from being dependents on parents or the state so that they become economically active citizens who will potentially improve the country’s outlook. When looking at this together with political and economic concerns, problematic items appear in the country’s inventory. These are items that are negative and detrimental to society’s progress, and there is danger in all of them tilting South Africa to the edge of political crisis or economic collapse. Persistent fragility The 2018 Goalkeepers Report published by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, which looks at the impact of the growth of young populations on the future, shows that the persistent fragility of a growing African youth population’s inability to enter the labour market presents as social and national instability. This is seen in the mass migration to already overcrowded urban areas that adds to the high and rising numbers of people living in poverty. A young population trapped in the lifelong circle of joblessness and poverty makes for a precarious country. These are but a few obvious underlying risks associated with a jobless future population that, if left unattended, might end up triggering events that could be tragic for the country. These effects are plausibly due to the continent being the only world region currently undergoing population growth. National security is a conceivable risk because we know that a desperate fight for – and access to – limited resources can cause conflict. This can lead to people fleeing their country, which can spread conflict to the neighbouring country. Politicians have mentioned the youth time and again as a transitory point in their speeches, but government has proven itself incapable of and unwilling to come up with tactics and associated initiatives to enable young people to enter the labour market. Such disorder cannot be allowed to continue since we know inimical challenges arise from demographic changes. Urbanisation and migration are among the main challenges governments struggle with. If we use the 2015/2016 World Bank Report – Development in an Era of Demographic Change – as a framework, South Africa can be classified as a receiving country “since migrant entry and any subsequent birth” adds to growing population. Damaging consequences The impact of a rising population on the labour market means a high growth rate of the working-age population. South Africa is no exception. This is particularly important in terms of its implications for South Africa tomorrow. There are damaging consequences for individuals who can’t participate in the labour market. Subsequently, there will be negative effects for a country’s economic, developmental and social outlook. Read: Hidden cause of youth unemployment It could be a costly mistake to overlook the demographic changes currently produced by the youth population. Discouragement and a feeling of being left out can escalate the threatening social discontent. Have we not noticed the number of young people at the forefront of service delivery protests? There are many things that need to be done to successfully manage the demographic pressure of a young population. Perhaps the most straightforward and clearest lesson for public policy and Corporate South Africa is to invest in human capital potential now rather than to react to their unemployment. A thriving youth population is a good for a country’s future. South Africa is part of a region in the world currently experiencing population growth that is dominated by the youth. The need to face up to this reality is most urgent. Failure to do so could prove catastrophic if it continues.