Here’s what caught our attention on Wednesday: 1. Steinhoff places KAP shares Steinhoff, on Tuesday, announced its intent to launch an accelerated bookbuild in which it offered to place up to 694 206 661 ordinary shares in KAP Industrial. The retailer, which is working hard to regain its momentum, confirmed on Wednesday that it had successfully placed the placing shares at a price of R6.85 per unit. The total gross proceeds have therefore amounted to R4.8 billion, according to its statement. Steinhoff adds that through placing shares, Steinhoff will no long hold a direct interest in KAP. Settlement is expected to take place on April 1, 2019. 2. Rhodes Food trading update The owner of Magpie, Packo and other brands, Rhodes Food Group, released a trading update for the five months ended February 2019, in which it highlights an increase in group turnover of 8% and an 8.2% increase in regional segment turnover, despite a ‘challenging trading environment’. The company says its fresh food sales increased by 1.4%, while ready meals and the pie category remained resilient. The R30 million acquisition of RCL Food’s protein snack business has also been completed. Interim results are due on May 21, 2019. 3. Nampak trading update Packaging company, Nampak released a trading update for the five months ended February 28, 2019, in which it highlights the performance in its African businesses. The array of tough economic conditions in SA, including slow GDP growth, high interest rates, high fuel and electricity tariffs and rising unemployment were challenging, but Nampak says consumers began trading down to value and in-house brands and purchased more canned fish and vegetables, which benefitted the business. In Angola demand was subdued due to high inflation, but it expects a better performance from its Nigerian businesses following improvements in GDP. It is still assessing its Zimbabwean units after the new RTGS was introduced. The company says it has a target gearing range of 40 to 60%. Results will be released on May 29, 2019. 4. PIC to recover interest paid to Ayo The case which was heard by the North Gauteng High Court relating to the PIC’s investment into Ayo Technology to be recouped is going ahead. According to Fin24 on Tuesday, the PIC, South Africa’s biggest fund manager said it will still go ahead with the steps to recover almost R4.3 billion it invested in Ayo Technology, after the Companies and Intellectual Property Commission (CIPC) issued it with a notice. Initially, the PIC had 15 days to recoup its monies, but this was later changed to 60 days. Furthermore, on Tuesday it was also reported that the PIC’s acting CEO, Matshepo More had been suspended for allegedly interfering in the PIC inquiry currently underway. The position is now being assumed by Vuyani Hako. Read: PIC state asset manager suspends acting CEO 5. Alexander Forbes looks for buyer for insurance business Financial services firm, Alexander Forbes is said to be looking for a buyer for its insurance unit as it seeks to refocus its business into a wealth and fund manager. According to Reuters, ‘selling the insurance business would release money that regulators demand be held against insurance policies’. Read: Alex Forbes exits insurance business in strategic overhaul