Insurance company Centriq lost its appeal after it was held liable in the Bloemfontein High Court for the claim of a financial advisor who was sued for his advice on the Sharemax pyramid scheme. The case is one of many surrounding the Sharemax property scheme in which thousands of investors lost billions due to the adverse consequences of advice provided by their financial advisors. Centriq took its case to the Supreme Court of Appeal, arguing that it was not liable to pay financial advisor José Castro’s claim because of “an exclusion clause” in its indemnity policy. Castro lodged an indemnity claim after legal proceedings were instituted against him by Marisa Oosthuizen, a client who lost R2 million after investing in the failed Sharemax scheme on the back of advice given to her by Castro. Exclusion clause Centriq argued in the high court that it had no obligation to indemnify Castro since Oosthuizen’s investment loss fell “within the specific exclusion” of a clause in its policy. This exclusion was triggered if the claim arose from a loss in value of an investment that failed to appreciate in the manner the advisor said it would. Centriq said the investment was “hopeless from the onset” and, according to the evidence of investment strategist Magnus Heystek, no “reasonably informed buyer” would have touched the scheme with the proverbial bargepole. Castro and Centriq did not contest the court’s finding that Castro was liable to Oosthuizen for her loss, but Centriq maintained it was not obliged to pay Castro’s indemnity claim. After losing her husband in an accident, Oosthuizen received a life policy payout amounting to R3.4 million. She decided to invest R2 million of the payout, and was advised by Castro to invest the full amount in Sharemax. The investment was tied to the Villa Retail Park, but Castro failed to alert Oosthuizen to the fact that the development scheme had not yet been completed. ‘Hopeless’ investment The high court concluded, on the evidence of Heystek, that the investment was “hopeless” from the onset and that the loss was not contributed to by depreciation (failure to appreciate) as set out in the exclusion clause. The supreme court said the onus rested on Centriq to show that Castro’s claim fell within the exclusion clause, but it did not discharge its onus. “The court a quo [court of first instance] correctly considered the language used as referring to the reduction in value resulting from market or investment forces rather than the type of loss that occurred here,” Judge Azhar Cachalia wrote on behalf of a coram of judges. Oosthuizen sued Castro because he neglected to give her advice, suitable to her needs, for a safe investment and not because the investment had not performed in accordance with the advice she received. She made it clear to Castro that she could not afford any risk, and that she could not afford to lose two cents. Castro did draw her attention to several highly critical media articles pertaining to the Sharemax property syndication schemes. However, the appeal court found that Castro referred her to the articles not to warn her of the pitfalls of the investment, but to assure her that there was no substance to the criticism. He also failed to inform her that she was not investing directly in fixed property. “It was, to be kind to Mr Castro, an investment that he himself did not properly understand,” Cachalia wrote. Centriq, however, criticised the high court for failing to properly interpret the exclusion clause. Centriq contended that the policy was not limited to cover based on Castro’s business as a financial advisor, and that he was still covered for negligent advice for other aspects of his business. It claimed it was “entitled” to decline to underwrite investment risk “of any type”, even if the client made an investment on the basis of negligent advice. Judge Cachalia wrote that courts are not entitled to “lean to a construction more favourable to an insured than the language of the contract, properly construed, permits”. The judges found that Centriq offered the policy to members of the Financial Intermediaries Association, whose main business is to offer financial advice. “It is difficult to accept that it was the mutual intention of these members and Centriq to exclude all coverage of their investment business.” The court also found that if Centriq wanted to achieve this type of exclusion it should have said so in clear language. “Instead, it chose obscure language.”