With the price of the most talked-about cryptocurrency, bitcoin, having stabilised at the $4 000 dollar level (R50 000), many investors could be licking their wounds with the price declining by more than 50% during the last 12 months. The question many may be asking is – where to from here? While most of the hype and speculation continues to focus on the investment case for or against cryptocurrencies, it may behoove investors to instead consider the financial planning implications of investing in cryptocurrencies, with a specific focus on estate and tax planning. Let’s pause for a moment to consider the merits of appropriate planning and look specifically at how widely cryptocurrencies are used in South Africa. There have been a number of research papers on the use and acceptance of cryptocurrencies in this country, but it remains difficult to accurately determine the extent of investment into cryptocurrencies. From the various research reports, we can make the following conclusions: It is evident that there is an increased need for appropriate financial planning and the integration of cryptocurrencies into a broader financial planning framework. The emotional argument Let’s start with the emotional argument and the importance of disclosing cryptocurrencies to family or friends to ensure that the investment does not disappear into cyberspace with the demise or incapacity of the investor. Investing in cryptocurrencies provides many different layers of security, including: online authentication, public wallets, private wallets (known only to the investor) and, potentially, some method of verification such as via a mobile phone. To ensure that your investments are not lost on your passing, it is important that appropriate documentation is kept as part of the estate planning process. At a minimum, the assets and the platform or exchange that was utilised should be included as part of your estate plan. Further, an investor with significant assets in cryptocurrencies can consider leaving the details of their crypto investments in a secure place such as a safe or safety deposit box, allowing relatives to access these investments in case of death or incapacity. Most cryptocurrency exchanges have a policy with respect to how they treat investments upon death. The less emotional question The second, less emotional question is: should investors disclose their crypto assets in their income tax returns? The South African Revenue Service (Sars) clarified its stance in a statement on the tax treatment of cryptocurrencies in 2018, confirming that it will continue to apply normal income tax rules to cryptocurrencies. Broadly, one can categorise crypto transactions into the following categories: * Generating income in the course of business: This is referred to as mining cryptocurrencies. Such income is subject to normal income tax. The person may further be liable to register as a provisional taxpayer if the total taxable income received exceeds the tax threshold for the financial year. * Receiving cryptocurrencies as payment: This should be included as income for income tax purposes. * Investing in cryptocurrencies: If the nature of the activity is for long term investment, any potential gain or loss could be classified as capital. * Speculating in cryptocurrencies: Buying and selling cryptocurrencies with the intent of making a profit can be classified as speculating and as such this profit or loss will be included as income. Even though the above should provide some guidance, each case will be assessed on merit and on the intention of the tax payer. With many investors having only invested ‘late’ in the cycle and, potentially, having made losses in either investing or speculating in cryptocurrencies, it is important to note that any potential losses can be offset against other income or capital gains as per normal income tax rules. Given the increased focus of various regulators on fintec, cryptocurrencies and the taxation of worldwide assets, it is only a matter of time until the loopholes in this once ‘secret’ investment category will be tightened. Further, as per the Tax Administration Act, taxpayers may be subject to penalties, depending on the behaviour involved, if they do not disclose their dealings in cryptocurrencies. We strongly advise investors to include cryptocurrencies in both their tax and estate planning in consultation with a financial advisor or tax practitioner. Including cryptocurrencies in your tax assessment Source : The Beancounter We strongly advise investors to include cryptocurrencies in both their tax and estate planning in consultation with a financial advisor or tax practitioner. Wynand Gouws is a wealth manager at Gradidge-Mahura Investments