The Companies and Intellectual Property Commission (CIPC) was established as a juristic person under Section 185 of the Companies Act, 2008, (the Act). It has tremendous powers, but it must be impartial and act without fear, favour, or prejudice. Once it decides to launch an investigation, it can issue a summons to any person for information, and it has the authority to enter and search under a warrant. Included in its objectives is enforcing compliance with the act and applicable legislation. As the CIPC goes about its business of administering the registration of companies and other juristic persons and overseeing the protection of intellectual property, it generally isn’t in the spotlight. It makes the occasional application to a court to have a director declared a delinquent director. A week ago the CIPC hit the headlines when it issued a Compliance Notice to the PIC directors in regard to PIC’s equity investment in Ayo of R4.3 billion. The Compliance Notice states that the commission believes on reasonable grounds that the PIC Board of Directors has contravened the Companies Act (namely section 76), and prescribes the remedies to “bring the company’s conduct into compliance with the act”. These remedies direct that the board of directors must: Read: PIC inquiry: R4.3bn Ayo deal approved in record 3 weeks The CIPC’s administrative action in issuing the Compliance Notice raises a number of questions: Read: More questions raised over PIC governance processes Now that President Cyril Ramaphosa has put the country on track of undoing wrongs, and everyone has been following the various inquiries and commissions with shock, horror and anger, has the CIPC been spurred on to start enforcing compliance more rigorously? Issuing the Compliance Notice has created a stir, but is it backed up by the Companies Act? Perhaps the CIPC will now issue Compliance Notices to all the parties that have been flouting the act in one way or another. Meanwhile, the PIC will no doubt bring an application in terms of Section 172 of the act to the Companies Tribunal of South Africa for a review of the Compliance Notice issued by the CIPC. We have not heard the end of this matter. Read: CIPC notice to PIC will set precedent – Iraj Abedian Moneyweb reached out to the CIPC for comment but did not receive anything back prior to publishing. Should a response come through, the story will be updated. The compliance notice is available here.