Although the average exposure balanced funds had to global assets declined slightly between 2017 and 2018, most managers had close to the maximum 30% offshore exposure, a new survey shows. According to the Alexander Forbes Global Balanced Manager Watch Survey, which represents the best investment views of 27 fund managers with regard to their Regulation 28-compliant portfolios, the average global allocation dropped from 24.66% at the end of 2017 to 24.56% a year later. The average was influenced by a few managers who had low offshore allocations, including Kagiso at 15.5%, Cadiz at 15.6% and Ashburton at 22.5%. Only nine managers were at 26% or less. Source: Alexander Forbes The Regulation 28 offshore allocation limits for pension funds were increased from 25% to 30% and the allocation to African investments (outside South Africa) from 5% to 10% in 2018. Slight dip should be viewed in context Janina Slawski, principal investment consultant at Alexander Forbes Investments, says the average offshore allocation came as a surprise. She expected it to be higher given the relaxation of offshore allocation limits and the rand depreciation over the course of 2018, but the marginal dip in the average should be seen against the background of a few low allocations. Since asset allocation has a meaningful impact on returns in the long run, the limits imposed by Regulation 28 are a contentious issue, with critics arguing that capping equity and offshore exposure is to the detriment of long-term investors, while proponents say the limits are critical for risk management for the average retirement fund investor. The difficult market environment and underperformance of the JSE over the past few years have led to some difficult conversations around asset allocation. Yet some managers have recently highlighted that specific locally listed shares have reached attractive valuations. Attractive opportunities locally Slawski says diversification analysis generally shows that having between 30% and 40% of a portfolio offshore makes sense, but if managers see some local opportunities that weren’t available in 2018, one would expect their offshore allocation to drop somewhat going forward. However, asset allocation is never quite as easy as deciding between local and global. Gyongyi King, chief investment officer at Alexander Forbes Investments, says fund managers do point to more attractive valuations in the local market – certainly more than during the last couple of years, but this also means that their local asset allocation would probably change. If managers were quite heavily invested in more defensive assets, they might tilt the portfolio to growth assets like equities. Restrictions on offshore exposure have been relaxed quite significantly over the past two decades – and when almost a third of the portfolio can be allocated offshore, the considerations are different from when the allocation was much lower, she adds. One should also keep in mind that a decision to invest in South African stocks does not necessarily mean a fund will be exposed solely to the local economy as a significant proportion of the earnings of many JSE-listed companies come from offshore.