Discovery Bank has signed up over 22 000 customers in the three months since it began onboarding members of the public. Those customers have a total of over 50 000 accounts. Originally, it had expected to publicly launch in March, but says the “slight” delay was “to ensure the delivery of a robust, brilliant bank”. This allowed it to make “refinements” to key elements of the bank. One of these was the overhaul of its Discovery Miles rewards proposition, which is being pivoted into what it describes as “e-money”. Effectively, cashbacks and discounts will be converted into Discovery Miles, which can be spent in the same way as cash within its ecosystem and at its rewards partners. This means rewards will be able to be monetised. In the early onboarding phase (before June), customers told Discovery they didn’t just want dynamic discounts. In the nine weeks since it started accepting new clients, its 22 000-strong base has made R193 million in deposits, with credit card facilities totalling R900 million granted. Of this, around R200 million in credit has been used. These numbers sound high, but in truth represent deposits of under R4 000 per account and credit facilities of R40 000 per customer (on average). An extensive media campaign for the bank, including a TV commercial, started flighting on Tuesday.  Building the bank has come at significant cost to Discovery. It anticipated spending R3.2 billion and has come in under budget (at R3.1 billion). The build phase (R1.7 billion) cost more than expected, while the test and run phases came in under budget (the run phase was significantly lower). The group has had to look to banking for growth in South Africa, given that it has successfully entered all major insurance markets. Insurance Discovery Life holds a 31% share of the retail affluent market – the leader by some margin. While normalised operating profit was down 9% for the full year to June 2019 (to R3.2 billion), this was a significant improvement on the first half. That period was impacted by high-value mortality claims volatility (which saw a reduction in operating profit of 13%). New business growth remains strong at 6%. Health The 1% growth in new business (annual premium income) at Discovery Health was driven entirely by growth within closed schemes (excluding the new closed schemes taken on). New business in the open Discovery Health Medical Scheme declined by 1%, or R70 million, to R5.3 billion. Factoring in NHI Key to the future of this business is how successfully it manages to (what it euphemistically terms) “navigate” government’s National Health Insurance (NHI) plan. As at last September, it held 56.6% of the market by members, according to the Council for Medical Schemes. The group says it is “supportive” of an NHI system “that assists in strengthening and improving the healthcare system for all South Africans”. It says the “publication of the NHI Bill creates an important opportunity for active collaboration between the Department of Health and the private healthcare sector, and Discovery intends to play a significant role in this collaboration”. Read: NHI benefits and implementation remain undiagnosed It adds: “The bill states that medical schemes will provide ‘complementary cover’ to the NHI once it is ‘fully implemented’. “Discovery Health is seeking clarity on these aspects of the bill.” Its “strong view is that substantially limiting the role of medical schemes would be counterproductive to the NHI, because there are simply insufficient resources to meet the needs of all South Africans”. More frankly, it states that: “Limiting people from purchasing the medical scheme coverage they seek will seriously curtail the healthcare they expect and demand. This will erode sentiment, strip the country of skills, and impact the economy. Crucially, by preventing those who can afford it from using their medical scheme cover and forcing them into the NHI system is an approach that will also have the effect of increasing the burden on the NHI and will drain the very resources that must be used for people in most need. This would be detrimental to all South Africans, and would undermine the objectives of the NHI.” In a voluntary update last month, it said: “Importantly, we do not envisage any material impact on the medical scheme administration business of Discovery Health for the foreseeable future. The rollout of the NHI is expected to take place over an extended period, and will be constrained by the current fiscal position. In addition … the bill remains open to interpretation regarding its impact on medical schemes, and we expect medical schemes to continue operating alongside the NHI.” In its results announcement on Wednesday, it said: “The bill is not expected to have a material long-term impact on the Discovery Health business and may in fact present new opportunities for growth and product innovation.” Discovery Group results for the year to June 2019  Operating profit Change New business Change Discovery Health R3 billion +10% R6.6 billion +1% Discovery Life R3.3 billion -9% R2.3 billion +6% Discovery Invest R966 million +9% R2.6 billion +6% Discovery Insure R155 million +128% R1 billion -1% Vitality Health (UK) R758 million +29% R1.3 billion +22% Vitality Life (UK) R578 million +12% R1.2 billion +10% Ping An Health (China) R106 million +89% R2.518 billion +76% Vitality Group R161 million +71% R922 million +43% By the end of Discovery’s 2020 financial year, all mature and emerging units in the group will likely generate in excess of R1 billion in new business (currently only one doesn’t). New business It also generated R386 million in new business from new initiatives: Source: Discovery annual results presentation These businesses (and the bank) lost R1.3 billion in the year, which represents 21% of earnings. This investment in new initiatives is expected to peak at 24% of earnings next year, but Discovery says “spend on new businesses is expected to decrease toward the long-term goal of 10% of earnings over the next few years”. Source: Discovery annual results presentation Its model is repeatable; the operating losses will turn to profits. Some initiatives will however take longer than others. For the bank – the biggest bet among its new initiatives – Discovery needs “roughly 500 000 to 600 000 clients” to break even. That’s a very tall order. For one, not all of the 300 000 existing Discovery Card customers are going to migrate to Discovery Bank. And for perspective, consider that it has 828 000 Vitality members in South Africa. Of course, a growing economy will change matters. Hilton Tarrant works at YFM. He can still be contacted at hilton@moneyweb.co.za.