Here’s what caught our attention on Thursday: 1. Blue Label results Blue Label Telecoms released its audited results for the year ended May 31, 2019. The company is reporting a headline loss per share of 312.49 cents and a core headline loss of 304.77 cents for the period. The company attributes the losses to Cell C’s trading losses, impairment of its property, plant and equipment and the impact of a de-recognition of its deferred tax asset and the impairment of Blue Label’s total investment therein. It adds that an impairment of Blue Label’s total investment in the Oxigen India group also contributed to losses. Gross profit increased by 16% to R2.65 billion and revenue amounted to R25.9 billion. Read: Blue Label to take a huge knock from Cell C impairment, losses 2. Capitec Bank results Capitec Bank is reporting a 20% increase in headline earnings per share to 2 545 cents per share, while earnings per share increased by 20% to 2 549 cents for the six months ended May 31, 2019. Capitec’s operating profit before tax increased by 18% to R3.38 billion and a dividend of 775 cents per share is being declared for the period. Read: Capitec profit jumps 20%, meets expectations 3. Tourism dips South Africa’s international tourism figures for the rest of 2019 are looking bleak, and the situation is becoming cause for concern for the industry. According to Stats SA’s latest monthly tourism and migration data, foreign arrivals are down 5%. The data also reveals that South Africans are travelling overseas less, with arrivals by South Africans down 11.8%, while departures were down 11.6%. The CEO of the Tourism Business Council of South Africa, Tshifhiwa Tshivhengwa, says that recovery for the sector is unlikely in 2019. Read: SA’s international tourist arrivals ‘not looking good’ 4. August PPI Producer price inflation for August is expected to be released on Thursday. In July, PPI increased 4.9% year-on-year and eased from a 5.8% increase in June, data shows. Costs slowed for textiles, clothing and footwear and transport equipment and prices rose for food, beverages and tobacco, paper and printed products, non-metallic-mineral products, electrical machinery and other equipment. Update to follow. 5. Rand update Geopolitical events have wreaked havoc on the local currency this week. In the US, a formal impeachment inquiry against President Donald Trump is being launched, rattling emerging markets and keeping traders on the sidelines of riskier assets. The rand on Thursday broke through the R15 mark, sitting at R15.05 to the dollar at 8:56.