At the start of 2013 over 70% of unit trusts in the South Africa equity general, multi-asset high equity, multi-asset medium equity and multi-asset low equity categories had outperformed a benchmark of consumer price inflation (CPI) plus 3% over the previous three years. At the end of June 2019, that number had fallen to below 5%. This highlights just how difficult it has been to find returns in the local market over the last few years. The illustration in this video from Corion Capital puts the current conditions in stark perspective.  It shows how three-year rolling returns for investors had been strong across all of these unit trust categories through 2013, 2014 and most of 2015. However, they started to decline, and by 2017 had fallen dramatically. These low returns have now persisted for three years, to the extent that many local unit trusts have struggled to even beat inflation. Read: Only 20 local equity funds have beaten inflation over five years For the five years to the end of August, the average five-year annualised return from funds in the South Africa general equity category was just 1.7%. According to David Bacher, chief investment officer at Corion Capital, this is the lowest nominal five-year annualised return on record, based on data going back to the 1970s. Record weakness “On a real return basis, the past five years provided an average return of 3.2 % below inflation,” says Bacher. “This is the lowest five-year annualised real return since May 2003.” On an average basis, multi-asset funds in the high equity, medium equity and low equity categories have also delivered their lowest five-year annualised returns on record. “Approximately 94% of the South African funds that contain some equity content have now not delivered an annualised real return of greater than 3% for over six years – since September 2013,” Bacher notes. It is understandable for investors to feel uneasy in this environment. When a lack of growth has persisted for this long, it starts to feel like it may never return. Longer term picture It is, however, important to maintain some perspective. An investor saving for retirement should be more concerned about returns over 30 or 40 years than they are about what has happened in the past half a decade. “In the context of a long-term savings plan, five years is still a relatively short period,” says Bacher. “Should one look back over longer periods, the experience is much more uplifting.” That is because the years that preceded the current period delivered unusually strong returns. Over the past 10 years, funds in the South Africa general equity category provided an average annualised return above inflation of approximately 3.5%. Over 15 years, the average return of funds in this category is approximately 6.7% ahead of inflation. This demonstrates why it is always important to put performance in context. Over the long term, investing in the stock market has been by far the most likely way to grow wealth. It may feel more comfortable to invest in ‘safer’ assets like bonds and cash now, but this raises the risk of missing out on the long term benefits of equities. If an investor disinvests now, how will they know when the best time will be to get back in? Read: It makes no difference whether the JSE went up or down today As Bacher notes: “We feel that investors should not make any rash or emotive investment decisions and should stick to their long term financial plans, as over the longer term, investors have historically been well compensated for having equity exposure.”