In an uncertain global economic environment, investors are inclined to deviate from their financial plan and make impulsive investment decisions, often based on little more than an emotional reaction. Globally, concerns around growth, a potential recession and intensifying trade wars have all weighed negatively on investor sentiment – and, as a result, on market returns. Locally, the outlook for the South African economy appears to be even more pessimistic, as GDP growth numbers continue to disappoint and a sovereign credit rating downgrade from Moody’s is becoming more imminent. In this type of environment, the likelihood and cost of making incorrect investment decisions increases. As a result, investment outcomes become less predictable. The best way to increase the predictability of income and capital returns in volatile times is to invest in robust high-quality companies whose growth prospects are largely unaffected by economic, political or technological disruptions. Highest quality found offshore In our view, these companies tend to be offshore businesses, typically listed on first world exchanges. In particular, large, well-established, blue-chip multinational dividend-paying companies such as Johnson & Johnson, Unilever, Nestlé and Coca-Cola. These companies are market leaders in their industries and have the best quality, strongest branded products that are integral to the lives of their customers. This gives them strong pricing power – the ability to increase prices without losing customers. With a global footprint and trusted brands, these companies are best able to capitalise on long-term trends such as consumerism, ageing demographics and the fourth industrial revolution. Reliable dividends The combination of the above-listed traits enables these companies to deliver reliable growing dividend streams over time. The graph below illustrates this by highlighting Johnson & Johnson’s ability to grow dividends through various financial crises. Source: Bloomberg By taking a long-term view and investing in quality stocks that deliver predictable income, the capital takes care of itself, as demonstrated by Johnson & Johnson’s share price. This is based on the well-known premise that over the long term the primary driver of capital growth is income growth. Hence, if a company demonstrates the ability to deliver a reliable growing income stream, over the long term the capital value of the company will also grow reliably. Attractive valuations In a world of lower interest rates, these companies are becoming increasingly sought after. The graph below demonstrates the relative attractiveness of Procter & Gamble’s dividend yield versus the US 10-year government bond. What’s even more compelling is that companies like Procter & Gamble also have the ability to grow their dividends over time. Graph: Supplied The table below illustrates the dividend history of what we consider some of the highest quality offshore stocks as well as current valuations. Stock Consecutive dividend increases Current dividend yield Historic average dividend yield Procter & Gamble 63 2.5% 2.4% Johnson & Johnson 57 2.9% 2.2% Colgate-Palmolive 55 2.3% 2.1% Coca-Cola 55 2.9% 2.1% Medtronic 41 1.9% 1.3% Unilever 38 2.8% 2.7% Attractive valuations The world’s best dividend-paying companies are currently trading at attractive valuations and will likely serve investors well in a world of low-interest rates and slowing GDP growth. Marriott Income Specialists was established in 1862 and acquired by Old Mutual in 2005. It is now part of the Old Mutual Investment Group. The views and opinions shared in this article belong to their authors, cannot be construed as financial advice, and do not necessarily mirror the views and opinions of Moneyweb.