With predictions that 90% of the world’s population will live in cities by the turn of the century, the importance of cities as drivers of economic growth cannot be overemphasised. This is the view of Tom Walker, co-head of Global Real Estate Securities at London-based Schroders, which produces the Schroders Global Cities Index. The index is a ranking of the strongest city economies around the world based on five key criteria – population size aged 15 and over, GDP growth, university rankings, retail sales, and median household income. “Cities are at the forefront of economic growth and are becoming increasingly important, not only as centres of commerce, but knowledge, innovation, disruption and even addressing the issue of environmental sustainability in the face of climate change,” he says. Walker notes that mass urbanisation is a major factor in the increasing importance of cities, with millions of people moving to big cities each year for work and better opportunities. “Already most of the world’s population live in cities and the United Nations has forecast that by 2035 this figure will increase to 70%. Some forecasts suggest this to increase to 90% by the turn of the century.” He says bigger global cities such as Los Angeles, Hong Kong, London, New York and Shanghai will continue to play a key role in global growth as these major cities continue to attract talent as hubs of the new knowledge economy or ‘gig’ economy. View the Schroders Global Cities Index graph of the top 30 cities here. These cities feature strongly on the Schroders Global Cities Index, which the Schroder ISF Global Cities Real Estate fund uses to identify key locations in which to invest. The strategy has an investment portfolio of more than £1.2 billion (around R22.2 billion) largely invested in US gateway cities (55%), with cities in Asia and Europe making up around 25% and 15%, respectively. “We have a very simple investment philosophy – own real assets in the key global cities, which are the engines of global growth. Urbanisation will support the demand for these assets over the long term, providing both resilience in capital values and income growth. The lion’s share of our investments goes into developed cities featured on the Schroders Global Cities Index, which we update annually,” says Walker. With digital disruption impacting most major industries, from retail and finance to hotels and the property sectors, he says the Schroder ISF Global Cities Real Estate fund has a strategy positioned for change. “Real estate investing is evolving, and we believe we are at the forefront of this. Traditional property sub-sectors of office and retail make up an increasingly small part of our portfolio,” he notes. “There are a number of property sub-sectors which are seeing increasingly strong demand as cities grow, such as healthcare, residential (for rent), self-storage and student housing. One of the most interesting sub-sector investments in the portfolio is in data centres, effectively landlord to the cloud, which accounts for approximately 7% of the portfolio,” he adds. According to Walker, retail properties now only make up around 5% of the fund’s investments, while the office sector is at 15%. Residential property has grown to 20% and is held largely in the private rental space. Properties in the logistics and distributions space is around 15%. London and Hong Kong are ranked in second and third spot in Schroders Global Cities Index. Questioned about the impact of Brexit on London and recent protests in Hong Kong, Walker says that while these events present some uncertainty and risk, the two cities are likely to remain major global hubs. “If our data indicates that the relevance of these two cities is changing we will be ready to allocate capital elsewhere. The reality is that this is likely to be a slow process,” he says. “Apple, for example, has committed to London as its European base. In addition, demand for student accommodation in London is still high due to the many globally recognised universities it has.” Brought to you by Schroders.