The days of doing two annual assessments and swiping your gym card to grab a smoothie once a week and then achieving Diamond status are long gone. In 2020, Discovery’s Vitality will shift its focus to aligning a member’s status to actual health outcomes. There has been a steady and deliberate shift in this direction over the past number of years, following the launch of Active Rewards in late 2015. For a Vitality rewards status to actually mean anything when applied to Discovery’s product range – which relies on changing and incentivising healthier behaviour – it needs to be accurate. Discovery uses it, along with other data, to better price risk. This is particularly important in the Discovery Life business. Points updates In communication to brokers, Discovery says “points thresholds required to reach Bronze, Silver and Gold Vitality status will be lowered to encourage engagement and to align thresholds with points earning categories and health outcomes”. Additionally, the threshold to reach Diamond has changed from simply attaining Gold status for three years in a row. This is “to align the Vitality annual engagement and long-term mortality and morbidity outcomes of a Diamond Vitality status member”. Vitality points thresholds Source: Discovery Vitality The points tiering in the Vitality Health Check, which measures blood pressure, blood glucose, cholesterol, weight assessment and a non-smoker’s declaration remains the same. Members can still earn up to 22 500 points. Vitality Health Check points Source: Discovery Vitality The points awarded for an HIV test (currently 5 000) have been changed to incentivise an initial test (7 500 points, with 1 000 points for annual tests thereafter). Discovery notes that almost 50% of Vitality members are unaware of their HIV status. There are no changes to the Vitality Fitness Assessment, where up to 7 500 points can be earned. Mental wellbeing Mental wellbeing becomes a personalised health goal next year. Discovery says that by 2030 “depression will be the world’s number one burden of disease”. It adds that “30% of South Africans suffer from a mental illness in their lifetime”. It also points to the “strong link” between mental health and physical health. Members will complete “online mental wellbeing assessments across six key areas based on international guidelines”. Up to 1 000 points can be earned a year (500 every six months) for completing these. “The outcomes of these assessments are used to give the member a clinical risk score reflecting their risk of developing depression and anxiety.” Based on the outcome of these, members will receive tailored recommendations and interventions which could include reassessments every one, three or six months. There are also weekly “mental wellbeing goals to improve sleep and mindfulness”. Active Rewards With the points changes, Active Rewards becomes central to Vitality’s stated goal for 2020 of ensuring (and rewarding) “continued health engagement”. Workouts tracked with a Vitality-linked device will still earn you up to 300 points per day, depending on their duration and your average heart rate. Gym visits still earn 100 points per day, but these are now described as a “30-minute gym visit”. From January, members will earn Discovery Miles when achieving their weekly Active Rewards goals. “Members instantly earn 100 Discovery Miles for each goal they achieve” (exercise, drive and money). Members still earn a weekly play on the gameboard for every goal they achieve. The gameboard tiles will reveal various numbers of Discovery Miles. Achieving all three goals will earn a bonus play on the gameboard (meaning a total of four). New rewards partners Discovery says “members can spend Discovery Miles immediately through the Active Rewards partners or save them for up to five years for even higher value rewards.” From next year, Netflix, (DStv) Box Office, Cotton On, Sportsmans Warehouse, Typo, Exclusive Books, Makro and Uber (among others) will join existing partners including Nando’s, Kauai, Nü Health Food Café, Mugg & Bean, Woolworths, Pick n Pay, iStore, Sunglass Hut, Yuppiechef, Dis-Chem and Kulula. Source: Discovery Vitality Integration with bank As expected, Discovery will push its new bank proposition heavily. Not only are there the new weekly money goals that form part of Active Rewards, it will increasingly incentivise those who have a bank account. For example, only those who have a qualifying bank account are able to convert their Discovery Miles to cash. Read: Slow start for Discovery Bank Also, “from 1 October 2019, new gym booster activations will require Vitality members to have a qualifying Discovery Bank account”. “Vitality members that have previously activated the gym booster benefit will continue to get up to 100% off their gym membership, with the boosted portion paid in Discovery Miles early next year.” This is a big change, meaning members will pay the full premium for the gym contract, with the ‘rebate’ being paid back in miles. There’s also the newly launched 2020 Discovery Integrator, which will incentivise clients for holding both Discovery Health membership and a (“qualifying”) Discovery Bank account by removing the need for them to pay a monthly Vitality contribution. Read: Discovery Health’s 2020 medical aid increases By activating the free Vitality Health Tracker, linking a bank account, completing a Vitality Health Check and completing personalised health checks, members can earn up to 5000 Discovery Miles. This value, it says, “is equivalent to an effective reduction of 1% of the average medical scheme contribution in 2020”. Monthly contributions for (full) Vitality are up by 8% to 10%. Prices for Vitality Active “designed to make healthy living more accessible” are up by a significantly higher amount. Monthly fee increases  2019 2020 Change Vitality member R259 R280 8% Vitality member + 1 R309 R340 10% Vitality member + 2 R359 R395 10% Vitality Active (under 30) R45 R89 98% Vitality Active (over 30) R65 37% Hilton Tarrant works at YFM. He can still be contacted at hilton@moneyweb.co.za.