What if Discovery were valued as an intellectual property business? What if one put aside its traditional insurance businesses in its two core markets – South Africa and the United Kingdom – and focused just on the Vitality Group? One or two analysts have previously argued that parts of the Discovery group are increasingly demanding very different valuations. The insurance part of the business will be valued in relation to its embedded value. This is the sum of the present value of all future profits from its existing book plus net worth. As at end-June 2019, Discovery reported embedded value of R71.2 billion. At that time, it was trading at an approximately 37% premium to embedded value (this premium has historically been as high as 70%). But what of the Vitality Group? Simply, Discovery is leveraging its knowledge and experience in the SA and UK markets and allowing partners to use the Vitality intellectual property (IP). This behaviour-change platform allows its partners to drive the shared value model. Healthier behaviour, supported by incentives, results in healthier members which means lower claims, higher margins, positive selection and lower lapses for insurers. The insurers then pass much of this back to members via incentives. These could be rewards, (effective) premium discounts, cover boosts and unit funds boosts. Read: Vitality Open made me a (much) better driver The experience of partner John Hancock, one of the largest life insurers in the US, is astonishing. It has grown its business (measured by annual premiums) by 48% since the partnership started, three times faster than the US market. Sales of Vitality integrated products are growing at 57% annually, 10 times faster than traditional products. And, while 82% of customers engage with Vitality within their first 60 days, 76% stay engaged. Vitality, Discovery says, is changing the nature of John Hancock’s business. Leveraging Vitality globally started with small steps. Today, less than six years in, Discovery asserts that Vitality is the world’s largest behavioural platform linked to financial services. Membership across its partners nearly doubled in the past year (+88%), with compound annual growth rate of 168% since 2015. For now, profits remain modest … as modest as R161 million can be. On an operating profit basis, Vitality Group is about the same size as Discovery Insure. Vitality Group  2018 2019 Members 1.56 million 3.6 million Vitality members on Vitality1 800 000 1.5 million* Vitality integrated premiums $390 million $824 million Operating profit ($) $2.6 million $11.4 million Operating profit (rands) R34 million R161 million Revenue, including Vitality USA – in dollars $51.1 million $65 million Revenue, including Vitality USA – in rands R657 million R922 million * Of which 1.4 million are full Vitality members from insurance partners’ integrated products Until 2018, however, Discovery was hamstrung in how rapidly and cost-effectively it would be able to deploy Vitality for each partner. It would typically require an individual rebuild of Vitality, as well as its integration, each time. Source: Discovery 2019 annual results presentation This changed with the Vitality1 ‘insuretech’ platform, which the group last week said it had spent R653 million on. The result is a scaleable and flexible platform, which means far quicker and low-cost implementation at partners. ‘Franchise’ model This has enabled a so-called franchise model that expands the Discovery customer base beyond the very large national champions it had partnered with to date such as AIA (Hong Kong), Generali (Italy), John Hancock (US) and Sumitomo Life (Japan). These are markets that are generally smaller, with different economics, timing and return-on-capital considerations. In the Netherlands, with insurer asr, implementation will take around 12 000 work hours. Contrast this with its implementation in Japan, which took around 80 000 work hours, and you can clearly see the value of the Vitality1 platform. Discovery says it can install ‘Vitality Light’ for under $1 million within three months. The full build needs “at most” six months. Growth in the Vitality business, it says, will come from three strategies: Source: Discovery 2019 annual results presentation Not only is the growth in this business likely to resemble a hockey stick as the platform scales out, importantly, Vitality Group means mostly dollar-based earnings for Discovery. It expects 11 builds (or integrations) for franchise partners in the next year, from a pool of 27 customers and potential customers. Three are already live, with a further three approved. Eight partners are at the final due diligence or business case stage, and Discovery is “in discussion” with another 13. Discovery has an ambitious business mission for Vitality Group: “To provide a global behavioural change platform that is quick to implement, easy to configure and efficient to operate – serving over 50 million global users by 2023.” What if, a few years from now, Discovery realises the value of its Vitality platform and separately lists it as an IP business on a global stock exchange (it would obviously retain a majority stake)? Could Vitality be worth more than the rest of Discovery combined? The whole business is worth ‘just’ $5.25 billion today. An interesting thought exercise, no? Hilton Tarrant works at YFM. He can still be contacted at hilton@moneyweb.co.za.