Here’s what caught our attention on Tuesday: 1. Sars revenue collections hurt by lack of compliance The South African Revenue Services was seemingly disappointed with its collection results for the 2018/19 financial year, after it was reported that collections fell R14.6 billion short of government’s target. Sars acting commissioner, Mark Kingon said the decline in the level of compliance over the last few years, alongside weak economic growth are evident in the results. During the 2019/20 financial year, Sars is aiming to increase its collection target by 10%. Read: Sars: No quick fix for legacy of ‘disastrous’ few years 2. PIC inquiry granted extension The commission overseeing the PIC inquiry has been granted an additional three months to complete its investigations into allegations of wrongdoing at the fund manager. On Monday, the commission heard that the PIC ‘relied heavily on assurance providers such audit reports from auditors KPMG and PwC as well as the Sarb, around issues concerning the now inoperative, VBS Mutual Bank’. Moneyweb is reporting that the PIC was also not aware that the municipal deposits that VBS received were illegal. Sarb’s deputy governor, Kuben Naidoo is testifying on Tuesday. Read: PIC relied heavily on auditors and Sarb in its oversight of VBS 3. Brics bank lending to SA projects The New Development Bank, also know as the Brics Bank, is giving, one would say, a generous loan to South Africa for projects. During a meeting on Monday, the bank’s president KV Kamnath said the bank had approved $790 million of loans for three projects, namely Eskom’s Medupi power plant, the Lesotho Highlands water project and a renewable energy venture, Reuters reported. Struggling Eskom is the major beneficiary of the loan, receiving at least $660 million of the total amount. Read: Brics Banks lends R32bn to SA organisations 4. Steinhoff and European Investors extend standstill VEB/European Investors which sued Steinhoff in a Dutch court for ‘certain financial statements prospectuses and press releases’ which were misleading and incorrect according to VEB, has decided to extend its standstill agreement with Steinhoff until May 15. By definition, the standstill is the ‘suspension of the collective action between the parties in the Netherlands’. According to a statement on Sens, after the suspension VEB/European Investors and Steinhoff will be able to continue the legal proceedings or reach a settlement for affected shareholders through negotiations. 5. Rand update The rand was given some breathing space after Moody’s decided to defer its credit rating announcement on Friday, this improved investor sentiment more so because the next rating announcement is only expected in November. The rand was therefore swinging into positives but met friction following Monday’s downbeat Absa PMI, which fell to 45.0 points. On the global front, Chinese manufacturing data gave a boost to markets across the board, and eased fears of slowing global growth. On Tuesday, the rand was 14:21 to the dollar at 8:41. Read: Rand softer as Moody’s relief rally fades