The number of companies in the financial and business services sector has changed dramatically. While 222 532 companies in this sector submitted tax returns in 2007, South African Revenue Service (Sars) Company Income Tax (CIT) data shows this figure had shrunk to 139 664 in 2016 – a 37% decline. The CIT data records a decline of almost 83 000 incorporated firms. This sector includes banks, cash loan companies, short-term insurance firms and independent brokers, investment advisors, business consulting firms as well as real estate services. Figure 1 shows how the number of firms remained relatively stable from 2007 to 2010 before experiencing a rapid decline, then stabilising again from 2014 onwards. Source: Sars, EOSA Financial crisis and a business unfriendly environment A multitude of factors drove this sectoral decline. Among the most important: Long-term insurers contracted by 78% Sars records long-term insurance companies as a separate sector. The number of companies reporting in this sector declined by 78% from 312 in 2007 to 69 in 2016. Where the 312 had taxable income of R19.9 billion in 2007, the 69 in 2016 jointly registered losses of R6.6 billion. The fact that CIT from this sector nevertheless amounted to R12 billion is indicative of some large companies that record substantial profit. SMEs under particular stress A poor economic climate coupled with high regulatory requirements and the outflow of high-level, high-remunerated skilled professionals because of political and security reasons, knocked small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in the financial and business services sector. The change in average taxable income over the 10 years reflects the higher survival rate of larger companies. CIT data indicates that the SME component of the business world is particularly under stress. Contrary to popular belief, however, SMEs are not better creators of sustainable jobs than large companies. Nevertheless, the demise of many smaller firms is not a good outcome, since it contributes to concentration. Other sectors that registered substantial declines in the number of companies registered for CIT, were: Aside from a number of large firms, the South African world of enterprise is indeed in a rather precarious position. There is little if any understanding of that in governing circles and in policy. Johannes Wessels is director of the Enterprise Observatory of SA. This article first appeared here.