Legal & General Group, one of the world’s biggest investors, has modelled the climate crisis and sees both risk and opportunity. Not only will climate action cost less than expected, but it will make emerging economies more robust. The funds manager anticipates that it can start shifting its investment portfolio now and make extra money during the next few decades — even if politicians fail to act on limiting an increase in global temperatures. “The cost of transformation will be much more manageable than many people think,” said Nick Stansbury, head of commodities research at the investment management unit. Asset managers are increasingly trying to quantify the risks associated with climate change. While most still rely on external models of the future energy system to make decisions, Legal & General’s work is an indication that some are increasing their scrutiny of the issue. The investor formed a joint venture with management consultancy Baringa Partners to create a new global energy model. It provided people, data and some unspecified money for the project.  Their findings show a key benefit of tighter pollution rules will be declining demand for oil, That could reduce the economic risks that emerging nations led by China and India face, because “people are not vulnerable to an oil-price shock anymore,” Stansbury said in an interview. A key surprise is that costs are lower than expected when netted against the cost savings from energy efficiency and lower fossil-fuel expenses and investments. In 2050, extra costs may be about $291 billion a year, less than half a percent of expected global economic output. The asset manager is a top shareholder in all the largest oil companies and needs energy models that can incorporate changes more quickly, Stansbury said. “I do not want LGIM or our clients to be caught out by underestimating how fast demand for renewables can grow, like many other agencies have,” he said. Legal & General has also published editorials and pushed companies behind the scenes to disclose more information about how resilient their long-term strategies are against different climate change scenarios.