Here’s what caught our attention on Tuesday: 1. Amcu workers head back to work after strike Mine workers represented by the Association of Mineworkers and Construction Union (Amcu) are ready to head back to Sibanye-Stillwater mines after sealing a wage agreement. This brings to an end a five-month long strike. Last week, Amcu agreed to take a 5.5% pay rise for the first year and a 5.5% or consumer inflation rate-linked increase, whichever is higher, for the second and third year. The strike is said to have cost Sibanye-Stillwater $100 million in lost revenue. Read: Sibanye-Stillwater, Amcu seal wage deal 2. Standard Bank shareholders to vote on climate change Standard Bank’s upcoming AGM has a hot topic up for discussion: climate change. Moneyweb is reporting that the bank is the first listed company willing to discuss with its shareholders if it should be more transparent about its climate change risk, especially relevant to the carbon risk exposure of its lending portfolio, as well as its financing and investment activities. The recommendation was made by the Raith Foundation and shareholder activist, Theo Botha. The AGM will take place on May 30. Read: Standard Bank shareholders to vote on climate change 3. SA tech start-up goes global Snapt, a Johannesburg-founded tech start-up backed by billionaires Johann Rupert and Nicky Oppenheimer has made its way to Silicon Valley. Moneyweb is reporting that Snapt was developed by 14 year-old Dave Blakey, alongside his dad, many years ago, and specialises in managing computer traffic, balancing loads among servers and accelerating web flow in software format. According to Moneyweb, the company will be targeting as much as R212.4 million as it explores Silicon Valley. Read: Tech start-up Snapt snags Nasa and billionaires’ backing 4. Mr Price to list on A2X Mr Price will be the first retailer to carry out a secondary listing on A2X Markets, while retaining its primary listing on the JSE. There is no cost, risk or regulatory compliance for Mr Price as a result of the listing. According to a statement, Mr Price CEO Mark Blair says the secondary listing will give its current investors more choice and opens up opportunity for the company to attract new investors. Its shares will be available for trade on May 2. 5. Rand update The four-day Easter break did not give the rand much breathing space, this after it weakened against most global currencies on Thursday, following the release of weak European data and investor caution ahead of the long weekend. According to Rand Swiss, the local currency remained weak on Monday and reached R14.16 on Tuesday at 8:43. Read: Rand, bonds little changed, stocks set to open higher