Scientists are set to reveal the first-ever glimpse of a super-massive black hole today, as the Event Horizon Telescope releases the first results of its finding, a ‘groundbreaking’ discovery that could test Einstein’s theory of general relativity. Anticipation is building up ahead of the announcement, with scientists presenting the results simultaneously in Brussels, Santiago de Chile, Taipei, Tokyo and Washington. “Have you heard that something is brewing on April 10th? It’s no joke,” the EHT said in a tweet on April 1st. The collaboration of scientists could reveal what is called the “event horizon,” the boundary at the edge of a black hole where the gravitational pull is so strong that no conventional physical laws apply and nothing can escape. The existence of black holes, one of the more mysterious objects in the cosmos, has been universally accepted even though little is known about them. Black holes form from remnants of a large star that dies in a supernova explosion. Scientists estimate there could be as many as a billion black holes in the Milky Way, according to Nasa. The EHT’s work focuses on two super-massive black holes — the first, dubbed Sagittarius A* — sits at the center of the Milky Way with a mass of around 4.3 million times that of the sun and located 25 000 light years from earth. The second lies at the core of the M87 elliptical galaxy, about 50 million light years from earth, and is 1 500 times more massive than the Sagittarius A-star. Eight telescopes across the globe participated in the observations in 2017. They have been connected to create a virtual earth-sized telescope allowing to “measure the size of the emission regions of the two super-massive black holes with the largest apparent event horizons,” the EHT says on its website. The telescopes are scattered from volcanoes in Hawaii to Atacama’s desert in Chile to Antarctica and Europe. The images would represent a major scientific accomplishment and “an opportunity to rethink the cosmos and our place in it,” Priyamvada Natarajan, a professor of astronomy and physics at Yale University, wrote in an opinion article for the New York Times. The images would also test Albert Einstein’s theory of general relativity and whether they hold true close to the black hole, she said.