The following has been received in response to Startling rise in chartered accountancy failure rates, published by Moneyweb on March 22, 2019. The South African Institute of Chartered Accountants (Saica) wishes to address the negative perception that the low pass rate of the November 2018 Assessment of Professional Competence (APC) qualifying examination may have created in the eyes of the public. The organisation did not, as inferred by failed candidates, “raise the bar to professional entry” for the APC as a way of “cleaning up its image” in the light of several scandals involving high profile chartered accountants [CAs(SA)]. Saica strongly refutes this claim as well as claims that its marking strategy “allows for manipulation”. Every accounting role requires a specific set of knowledge and skills that varies depending on the type and complexity of the job. A competency based assessment process like the APC provides a way of building the skills and knowledge people need to perform their role. By developing and maintaining the standards of the CA(SA) qualification, Saica ensures individuals who qualify to register as CAs(SA) have the necessary technical and professional competence to meet the prescribed levels of technical, professional and ethical competence both at point-of-entry and on an ongoing basis through their careers as their roles change. “A core part of the Saica’s work includes developing and supporting the professional competence of its membership in the face of the increasing changes in the working world through robust education, training and professional assessment processes. Education and training is an essential component in instilling prospective members with a foundation of knowledge, skills and professional values that enables them to continue to learn and adapt to change throughout their professional lives so as to produce competent professional accountants who make a positive contribution to the profession and society in which they work during their lifetimes,” says Mandi Olivier, Saica senior executive: professional development. What does the APC measure? Many of the essential required characteristics of a CA(SA), such as independence, honesty, diligence, motivation and reliability, cannot be tested under technically-based examination conditions in a meaningful fashion. These characteristics must, instead, be evaluated by candidates’ proven abilities to demonstrate them in a real-world situation through a competency based assessment. Thus, through its multi-faceted case-study, the APC is designed to measure more [than] the candidates’ technical knowledge, but also assesses, for example, their ability to apply appropriate professional principles to practical situations, judgement, attitude, and the appreciation of ethical implications. Safeguarding the integrity of the profession, maintaining professional standards For Saica, safeguarding the integrity of the chartered accountant designation is an integral part of the process prospective candidates must successfully complete before qualifying as a CA(SA). For this reason, Saica works tirelessly to ensure its education, training and examination processes are rigorous, robust, fair and are in line with international best practice as outlined by the education and training standards of the International Federation of Accountants (IFAC). Indeed, it is of great significance that in isolated cases where Saica has previously been taken to court by a failed candidate, its processes have been found to be rigorous, robust and fair (refer to Chablal v Saica). Not only are these processes regularly reviewed by Saica’s peer institutes for reciprocity purposes to ensure these standards are being met and maintained, but a significant emphasis is placed on the checks and balances that govern Saica’s qualifying examinations process. These include: 1. Delegation of authority: The exam-setting process is managed through a series of independent committees who have the necessary and relevant expertise and experience to oversee their delegated component of the process. Various levels of external and independent reviews are performed over the paper before the exams are written. This independence and expertise further extends into the marking process. Accordingly, a significant number of checks and balances are in place at every step of the process, which means that the outcome is not a predetermined one. This rigorous delegation of authority ensures the independence of Saica’s examination process which seeks to evaluate candidate’s professional competence. 2. Guaranteed markers independence: All markers are appointed by Saica and are required to have marking experience. The process starts with extensive training for all markers and all markers are required to mark a benchmark examination script before they are eligible to start marking. Senior markers – comprising the umpire, team leaders and assistant team leaders – undergo a number of days of training before the other markers join the process for their training. In addition to this, all examinations are double-blind marked by two markers. In the case of a variance between the markers, a third senior marker is consulted to perform a moderation role to ensure uniformity. 3. State-of-the-art technology ensures consistency and anonymity: The Saica examination is written electronically (although candidates do have the option to opt out of the electronic writing process and write manually) and marked using an electronic tool, which provides real-time and granular information throughout the marking processes, in line with worldwide CA Institute best practice. This tool has many benefits for the marking process including identification of inconsistencies in marking during the process. The technology also ensures that all candidates’ scripts are anonymous, thereby removing any assumed prejudice, as markers do not know which candidate’s script they are marking, from which training office he/she emanates, or which professional programme he/she has completed. Saica is not taking the low pass rate in the 2018 APC lightly Given the high commitment to standards that have been developed over a period of time and which are often cited as examples of best practice in global circles, as well as an objective analysis of the facts, it is therefore apparent that the assumption that Saica used the recent professional examination results as a way [to] clean up the image of the profession is factually incorrect. Says Olivier: “The matter of the pass rates in the APC is a complex one and cannot be attributed to one single factor. Since releasing the results, Saica has undertaken a number of initiatives to explore and better understand the challenges faced by the failed 2018 APC candidates so as to obtain an in-depth understanding of all the underlying factors that could have contributed to the declining pass rate. So far our investigations have shown some interesting trends which we will address with training offices. For example, the organisation must also look at the depth and breadth of practical experience that candidates have obtained before writing this assessment as, by its very nature, this assessment is designed to assess professional competence. We must also analyse how the changing population of the exam candidates has also been attributed to the lower pass rate as, year-on-year, we are seeing more repeat candidates attempting this assessment shortly after writing the technically and mark based Initial Test of Competence (ITC) assessment which measures a different skill set.”