A 20-minute drive that load shedding stretched into two hours of putt-putting in Johannesburg’s sweltering heat was one of Thabo Jautse’s inspirations in deciding to build better traffic lights – blackout-busting traffic lights. Or robots, as we still like to call them in SA. Unlike the doomed frog in water that is gradually brought to bubbling point, Jautse wasn’t ready to be boiled alive. “Eventually, you have to jump out and say ‘How do I solve this problem?’,” says the 37-year-old co-founder of start-up Robolite. The congestion that results when load shedding puts traffic signals out of action not only wastes time and fuel, it costs the South Africa economy millions. A study by the University of Pretoria put the cost at R30 million per two-hour period that 1 000 of the country’s 14 000 traffic lights go dark – although this study was done in 2008, when South Africans first experienced load shedding. Not just a single lightbulb moment Jautse and fellow Robolite co-founder Colin Lau’s solution has been designed not only to beat blackouts, but thwart battery thieves too. The batteries charge while the system is plugged into the grid, and can then operate for about 12 hours when the power is cut. Like many start-ups, Robolite began at home with out-of-pocket funding used to buy off-the-shelf technology. The idea was to build proof-of-concept to show to potential investors. Jautse, who has 15 years’ experience in telecommunication sales, oversaw the redesign of the batteries. They become unusable if tampered with or stolen. The system will also use cameras to study traffic patterns so the lights know how to keep an efficient traffic flow when there’s a blackout. A second phase of the system will incorporate solar panels so the lights will be completely off-grid. Green light The concept got its first green light from the Support Programme for Industrial Innovation at the Department of Trade and Industry, which granted Robolite R5 million a year ago, says Jautse, who runs the company’s sales. Collectively, the company’s five shareholders, including Jautse, will put in another R1 million, he says. They will take their next step in July, when they approach the Industrial Development Corporation for black industrialist funding. If granted, it will be used to acquire new machinery to automate production and reduce outsourcing, says Jautse. The goal is to be able to sell an intersection’s worth of eight traffic lights for 60% less than those with traditional solar power set-ups, he says. It would undercut one of the findings of the University of Pretoria traffic light study: that the high cost of solar power makes it a prohibitive choice to replace Eskom power. It would seem a lot has happened in the 11 years since the study. Approvals and interest With an intersection mock-up flashing red and green like a Christmas display, and a team keen to make Robolite ready for market, Jautse hopes presents will arrive early this year – perhaps in September, with approval from the South African Bureau of Standards (SABS) and testing by the Johannesburg Roads Agency, South Africa’s largest owner of traffic lights. Thabo Jautse in Robolite’s Riversands Incubation Hub studio. Picture: Colin McClelland All this activity means Robolite may have to move out of its studio at the Riversands Incubation Hub in northern Johannesburg in the next year or so to find manufacturing premises. The start-up is one of numerous venture capital efforts at the 4.2 hectare campus, which is currently incubating some 160 young businesses and celebrates its fourth anniversary this year. It began from a private-public partnership between Century Property Development and the National Treasury Jobs Fund. Turning ideas into reality Most leases are confined to three years, with below-market rent of R2 700 a month plus Vat for a 50m² space helping turn ideas into reality, according to Riversands CEO Jenny Retief. “The core of the delivery is about greater speed for the entrepreneurs, to help them report problems and get answers,” Retief says, adding that Riversands is about building capability in businesses that may need coaching or mentoring. “Whether it’s funding, collecting revenues or deposits, or reducing external funding needs, we bring that structure to get fast responses.” South Africa’s venture capital industry remains small by global standards with around R1 billion invested in 2017, according to the Southern Africa Private Equity and Venture Capital Association. However, more capital pools have been tapped in recent years after the government made venture capital investments 100% tax deductible. In the footsteps of other successes Other Riversands successes include Vishal Nair’s car detailing business, Big Foot, which is moving into an Aston Martin dealership in Melrose Arch, and auto electrical company Mash Technologies which is already set up in the Johannesburg central business district. Rising stars include Seola Mashamaite, whose Montech Calibration Services has clients such as train-builder Alstom, construction company Murray & Roberts and Lancet Laboratories. She’s also expanding to Rwanda and Swaziland. Matlo Up, a network cabling and CCTV company started by Bongani Mkhonza and Kenny Nenzhelele, has used “crane spotting” – the search for new building sites – to double its revenue to R1 million for the past two years, Mkhonza said. “Riversands makes us professional,” he says.