Europe’s economy began 2019 with an unexpected growth spurt buoyed by France and Spain, easing pressure on the European Central Bank to add stimulus. The 0.4% increase in euro-region gross domestic product during the first quarter reported by Eurostat was twice the pace at the end of last year and more than economists predicted. Strong investment in Spain and buoyant consumer spending in France gave a fillip to expansion in the 19-nation currency bloc.  The euro extended gains after the report and traded up 0.3% at $1.1214 at 11:12 am Frankfurt time. While the region’s growth rate was below the average of the past five years, it marks the second quarterly acceleration since a downturn in trade and factory activity pulled the economy close to a standstill last summer. The current company reporting season in Europe is also shaping up to be fairly bullish — Airbus SE’s earnings surged in the first quarter on higher output of its A320 narrow-body jet. Some countries in the bloc have yet to experience a meaningful turnaround, with Germany expected to see the weakest expansion in six years. The first-quarter figure includes some German data provided to Eurostat by the country’s national statistics office. Official numbers for Europe’s largest economy will be released on May 15. Business confidence continued to soften in April, and the ECB has already said it won’t raise interest rates this year. Policy makers have expressed mixed feelings about whether a rebound initially penciled in for the second half will pan out. More evidence of weakness across the region could force them to make recently announced stimulus tools more accommodative to support growth. While resilience in Spain and France provides a brightening picture for the region, external trade conflicts and homegrown difficulties, notably an upheaval in Germany’s car industry, have yet to clear. Italy has been in recession in the second half of 2018. GDP data at 12 pm will show whether that slump has ended. Other data today: German unemployment fell 12 000 in April, more than economists expected, to a record low of 2.22 million. The labour agency said demand for workers continues to be very high. Italian joblessness slipped to 10.2% in March, the lowest since August. In France, consumer spending unexpectedly declined in March, while inflation accelerated to 1.4%. GDP growth in Lithuania slowed to 1% after 1.3%. Austria’s economy expanded 0.3%. © 2019 Bloomberg L.P