Newzroom Afrika, the new 24-hour new channel licensed by MultiChoice that replaces the defunct, formerly Gupta-owned ANN7, will be launched on DStv on Thursday. To be launched on the same channel previously occupied by ANN7 — DStv 405 — Newzroom Afrika said on Monday that it has hired a number of senior journalists to anchor its offering. It will launch into an already crowded television news environment, going head to head with SABC News and eNCA. Cathy Mohlahlana will serve as lead anchor, while political expert Thulazizwe Simelane, talk show veteran JJ Thabane and sports journalist Marc Lewis also join the line-up, it said. Sizwe Dhlomo and Gugu Mhlungu, alongside Natasha Thorp, will anchor the breakfast show, while news anchors Thabo Mdluli and Thami Ngubeni round off the on-air team. Business commentator Ayabonga Cawe will focus on the small business sector, with a focus on start-ups and the township economy. “Newzroom Afrika’s journalists will have licence to report fearlessly on any subject, backed by an independent editorial board chaired by former Press Ombudsman and veteran editor Joe Thloloe, along with SA Press Council advocate and Wits journalism educator Dinesh Balliah, and former Mail & Guardian editor and Code for Africa content strategist Chris Roper,” the broadcaster said in a statement. ‘Excited about news’ Former Power FM head of news Dianne Hawker heads up the news and current affairs department. Newzroom Africa is a partnership between television production entrepreneurs Thabile Ngwato and Thokozani Nkosi. The company was the winning bidder selected by MultiChoice to produce the news channel. It has hired over 200 journalists, presenters, technicians and digital specialists. “Our aim is to get viewers excited about news again,” said Nkosi. “We’ll provide verified, credible and authoritative news that people can trust to keep them informed on issues that matter most to them.” Newzroom Africa will be broadcast in high definition. It will be available for streaming on smartphones, tablets or on PCs through DStv Now, and will be available on all DStv bouquets.  — (c) 2019 NewsCentral Media This article was originally published on TechCentral here.