Extinction Rebellion activists took their climate-change campaign to Goldman Sachs Group  and the London Stock Exchange on Thursday, targeting the city’s trading hub to press their call for global action. Marchers with whistles, megaphones and drums halted traffic outside of Goldman Sachs International on Fleet Street at midmorning local time, after at least seven Extinction Rebellion members were arrested for gluing themselves to the main entrance of the LSE, temporarily blocking access. The protests were expected to spread to include the offices of Rothschild & Co., Nomura International and Deutsche Bank, according to a document seen by Bloomberg News. Demonstrators clad in all-black clothing with red ties and safety helmets blocked the LSE doors, saying they wanted to call attention to the “humans making choices” behind computer screens that affect the environment. Several others glued themselves to other LSE entrances with a Superglue-type substance. Police cleared the main entrance and arrested at least one person at the Newgate Street port. Those arrested may face charges of criminal damage and aggravated trespass, according to a police sergeant at the scene. Separately at the Canary Wharf DLR station, a set of activists climbed atop of a train with protest signs. Goldman Sachs and the London Stock Exchange declined to comment. The two-week protest has disrupted public transport and snarled roads and bridges in London, with targets including Heathrow Airport and Parliament Square. Police have made hundreds of arrests. The demonstrators are demanding that the UK acknowledge the “crisis” posed by global warming, enact legally binding policies to reduce net carbon emissions to zero by 2025, and form a citizens assembly to oversee changes. “We are demonstrating at the London Stock Exchange because there are people and businesses who are trading on ecological destruction, investing in fossil fuel, mining, palm oil companies and others,” said Adam Woodhall, a spokesman of Extinction Rebellion. “We want to highlight this poisonous system that enables climate catastrophe because it focuses on money.”