Figures released this month by UK asset management trade body The Investment Association found that just one in 10 firms in that country have a female chair or chief executive. Just 3% have a female chief investment officer. These numbers highlight an industry question that is far from limited to the UK. Around the world, asset managers are being asked, and often asking themselves, where are the senior women? Read: Where are the women money managers? Perhaps a more subtle question, however, is why it should matter. If an asset manager is delivering value for investors in terms of performance outcomes, why should anyone worry about what the individuals making the investment decisions look like? For Jeanette Marais, CEO of Momentum Investments, there are practical economic reasons why the issue is worth addressing “Probably half the students who leave university with a degree are women, but we lose them somewhere along the line,” says Marais. “It’s a massive waste for a country’s economy if half of the population is not getting the best out of the education they received and their money’s worth out of a career.” She also believes that women can bring different skills to an investment team. “Women tend to be less emotionally attached to decisions they have made because there is less ego involved,” Marais says. “Where many men will stick with a share just because they chose it and don’t want to go back on a decision, women are often more able to stick to a process.” This doesn’t mean that they are better money managers. They just bring a different element to a team that can result in better outcomes for investors. For Delphine Govender, chief investment officer at Perpetua Investment Managers, this is a critical consideration. Going along for the ride “Does what we have work optimally, based on the status quo?” Govender asks. “The truth is it doesn’t. The status quo is not resulting in outcomes without flaws, so we have to ask if that has something to do with the ingredients, and whether they are complete.” What is lacking, in many cases, is a diversity of voices – of people with different backgrounds, different experiences, and different views. One obvious shortcoming in this respect is not having more women in decision making roles. Govender believes that the failure of many asset managers to identify the problems at Steinhoff provides an interesting case study. “I’ve spoken to many investors about this – and when it really comes down to it, they admit that because of who was involved and what they related to as a natural embodiment of success, they were willing to suspend what residual doubt they might have had about the business model,” she says. “Part of the reason many investors were happy to go along for the ride was that [Pepkor founder and former Steinhoff chair] Christo Wiese was there, and the affinity they had with him in terms of the package he represented was absolutely a contributing factor.” This highlights the need for an investment team where not everyone thinks in the same way. “We don’t want a team of only chartered accountants or only actuaries,” says Govender. “We want scientists, or people with a passion for history, or engineers. “That cognitive diversity gives you an edge.” She believes this is even more the case now that asset managers are facing competition from artificial intelligence and machine learning. “If your edge in investing is your behaviour derived from your humanity, you cannot constrain that humanity to just one kind of group,” Govender argues. Given that women make up roughly half of the population, that diversity of voices is clearly never going to be complete unless they are more fully represented. It’s where we are However, for Nicola Ralston, one of the most experienced women in the UK asset management industry and a director of PiRho Investment Consulting, the diversity question may be less clear cut. “Groupthink is definitely a problem, and not good for investment decisions, but whether having diversity actually addresses this in practice, I don’t know,” says Ralston. “That’s one of the reasons why I would like a lot more information.” She believes that part of what is lacking in the discussion around women in asset management is that no matter how much it is talked about, there is very little empirical research on the subject. “I would love to know really whether there is evidence that diversity improves sustainability in terms of the robustness of investment strategies or firms,” Ralston says. “It seems a reasonable expectation that having people who don’t all think the same way would be good for performance, but whether that’s always true, I don’t know.” In her view, what is more significant is that an industry that doesn’t embrace women, their needs and their choices is rapidly becoming anachronistic. “I think it’s more about the kind of society that we want to live in, and whether we want genuine equality,” she says. “Most women don’t want the kind of society where to be successful they are required to fit an established career pattern.” Fundamentally, this is the reality that asset management has to face. Nobody should need a reason to question why women are under-represented or motivate why they shouldn’t be. “Why is this important? It’s because it’s 2019,” says Govender. “It’s because of where we are in the world. This isn’t even a question we should have. This is reality.”