Here’s what caught our attention on Wednesday: 1. March CPI and inflation rate South Africa‘s headline consumer inflation rate for March increased to 4.5% from 4.1% the previous month, on the back of increased fuel prices hitting transport costs. According to Stats SA, on average prices increased by 0.8% between February and March 2019. March’s core inflation rate, which excludes the prices of food, non-alcoholic beverages, petrol and energy, remained unchanged at 4.4% from the previous month, data shows. Read: Consumer inflation rises as fuel hikes hit transport costs 2. February retail sales figures Retail sales rose 1.1% year on year in February after rising by 1.2% in January, Statistics SA showed on Wednesday. The largest annual growth rates were recorded for retailers in household furniture, appliances and equipment and textiles, clothing, footwear and leather goods, while the major contributors to the 1.1% increase were retailers in textiles, clothing, footwear and leather goods and general dealers. On a month-on-month basis, sales increased 0.5%. 3. Clicks interim results Clicks has delivered a strong health and beauty sales performance, despite subdued economic growth and constrained consumer spending. The retail health and beauty sales category increased by 8.4% alongside the group’s pharmaceutical distributor, UPD, which increased operating profit by 27.2% during the six months ended February 28, 2019. Headline earnings per share increased by 13.2% to 300.1 cents and an interim dividend of 118.0 cents per share was declared, up 15.1% for the period. Read: Strong health and beauty sales lift Clicks HY earnings 4. Mediclinic trading update Mediclinic released a full year trading update for the 2019 financial year, in which it flags an increase in revenue by 3.5% while Ebitda is down by around 1.5%, in constant currency. Mediclinic Group expects adjusted earnings per share to decrease to around 27 pence, from 30 pence in 2018. The group’s CEO, Dr Ronnie van der Merwe says results for the FY 2019 are in line with market expectations in a challenging healthcare environment. He is encouraged by the group’s operational progress, and believes the business has delivered on its strategic objectives. Mediclinic opened a hospital in Dubai and several day clinics in Switzerland and Southern Africa in the reporting period. Full year results are expected to be released on May 23. Read: Mediclinic expects core profit to drop 3.5% for full year 5. BHP operational review Global resources company, BHP Group, has released an operational review for the nine months ended March 31, 2019. The company says production guidance for petroleum, copper, metallurgical coal and energy coal remain unchanged but iron ore production guidance decreased after Tropical Cyclone Veronica. CEO Andrew Mackenzie says during the quarter the group reported strong operational performance despite adverse weather conditions across Australia and Chile. The company statement adds that full year unit costs for Petroleum, Escondida and Queensland Coal are expected to be in line with guidance.