The company that led the development of popular hangout spots in the Maboneng Precinct in the inner city of Johannesburg auctioned off 18 buildings on April 15 as part of its liquidation process. Moneyweb previously reported that a total of R109.5 million was raised, with offers for the various buildings ranging from R400 000 to R32 million. This has brought a sad end to Propertuity, a company heralded as a pioneer of urban renewal projects. Who is behind Propertuity, and what was their business model? The company was started in 2007 by Jonathan Liebmann with an initial multi-million rand investment, the purchase of a building in Jeppestown, and a vision of creating a life in the city where people could work, play and live in a creative urban space. The business vehicle launched with property investments that collectively became known as the Maboneng Precinct. The company was a beacon of hope for greater investment in inner city regeneration. As with a conventional property developer, Propertuity bought inner city buildings, often in a state of disrepair, to fix up and sell at a profit or retain and earn rental income from. The portfolio included a mix of residential, retail and office space that housed advertising agencies, art galleries and private studios, among other attractions for the young and upwardly mobile. The model can be likened to redevelopment projects in cities like New York and London. It is speculated that, at its peak, the company sold millions of rands worth of property. It was on track to meet its 2020 vision of growing the precinct to an 11km2 radius with over 20 000 occupants. Elements that were key to Propertuity’s initial success included: What went wrong? Towards the end of 2016, in what can be described as one of the most important testimonies of a job well done to Liebmann and team, RMB Investment Holdings (RMH) announced that it would be purchasing a 34.1% stake in the business for an undisclosed amount. The firm introduced additional funding as well as some much-needed corporate governance structures. On paper, this investment made sense. RMH had announced its intention to create a property investment business and was looking forward to partnering with an entrepreneur such as Liebmann. However, it soon became apparent that things at Propertuity were not as they seemed. Some of the challenges stated in RMH’s annual financial statements were: Most concerning is that RMH stated that it had underestimated the operational complexity of expanding the business, which is strange given that it manages a multi-billion investment portfolio. One would think that quite a few of the issues raised were discoverable at the due diligence stage of the acquisition process. What were some of the interventions to salvage the business? A few strategic measures were taken, including: All these endeavours, however, proved to be in vain; months later, in October 2018, the shareholders commenced the liquidation process. What does the ending look like? The impairment of around R300 million incurred in the collapse of Propertuity is estimated not to have a material impact on earnings for RMH given its multi-billion rand investment portfolio. Although things may not have ended well with Propertuity, RMH still sees value in the inner city property company Divercity. Since leaving the management of the company, Liebmann has become involved in a new property app called Flow. In early 2019, it managed to raise R20 million, South Africa’s biggest seed investment for the new industry to date.