Here’s what caught our attention on Wednesday: 1. March Sacci BCI The South African Chamber of Commerce and Industry’s business confidence index fell hit a seven month slump in March, falling to 91.8 from 93.4 in February. Bloomberg is reporting that the index, which measures sentiment fell on the back of consistent power cuts during March. Read: SA business confidence slumps to 7-month low in March 2. Corruption Watch report Civil society group Corruption Watch is expected to release its seventh annual corruption report, entitled Upholding Democracy on Wednesday. The report will present evidence suggesting the correlation between corruption and the undermining of South Africa’s democracy. Furthermore, the report aims to highlight the emerging and existing trends of corruption, observations by the public and how corruption operates within different sectors in South Africa. The report will be released at 10 am. 3. PIC inquiry Testimonies at the PIC inquiry on Tuesday spilled the dirt on the fund manager’s loan to Steinhoff International’s empowerment partner, Lancaster Group. According to Moneyweb, the commission was told that Lancaster approached the PIC for a R10.4 billion loan to purchase a 3% stake in Steinhoff. The loan, once concluded, was reduced by R1 billion, with Lancaster being awarded R9.4 billion, which went towards transaction fees and the purchase of a 2.75% stake in the retailer. The amount was allegedly reduced to bypass the PIC board’s approval – or according to testimony – “to fall within the mandate limit of the investment committee”. The inquiry continues on Wednesday. Read: PIC: Funding request lowered to avoid needing board approval, inquiry hears 4. S&P comments on SA outlook S&P Global Ratings held day one of its two-day conference in Joburg on Tuesday, where it provided an optimistic outlook on South Africa’s economy. Sovereign analyst Gardner Rusike said South Africa’s economic expansion remains a risk, however S&P sees the growth rate doubling to 1.6% this year on the back of improved trade terms. According to Bloomberg, Rusike also added that S&P sees the ANC continuing with its reforms after elections – adding that reform will enable investment. Day two of the conference will take place on Thursday. <a href="http://iono.fm/e/675036">Content hosted by iono.fm</a> 5. Renewable energy buoys Eskom South Africa is known for its great sunlight and favourable weather conditions – and tapping into these is beneficial for renewable energy providers. During the recent power supply crisis a number of independent power producers (IPP) are said to have eased the electricity demand on Eskom, by helping bridge the supply gap. According to Moneyweb, data from the Department of Public Enterprises and Eskom reflects just how important the contribution from solar and wind is becoming. Together, they are consistently supplying just under 2 000 MW of power, or 7% of total supply, daily. Read: How renewables are helping Eskom keep the lights on