The failure rate of small businesses in South Africa may be high, but these enterprises remain the backbone of the economy, providing job opportunities and contributing to GDP growth. With the recent announcement of government job cuts over the next three years, and with only 22% of corporate CEOs being “very confident” of their companies’ growth in the next 12 months, the country will be increasingly reliant on the small business sector to deliver jobs. To achieve this, a supportive environment must be created to bolster small business survival and facilitate growth. Access to finance is a critical component, and one that requires urgent attention. Finfind published South Africa’s Inaugural SMME Access to Finance Report earlier this year. The report, sponsored by the SA SME Fund, details the SMME access-to-finance landscape and has identified a lack of skills in micro, small and medium-sized business owners as a substantial challenge to accessing finance. Many of these business owners lack the skills required to find the right funders and to identify the appropriate finance product that matches their particular funding need. Many also struggle to prepare the relevant business documentation required by finance providers, and lack the know-how needed to present their business funding case in a way that will enable them to access the finance. Access to funding is crucial for business sustainability and growth, but sadly many applications are rejected due to poor financial skills and lack of funding experience by the business owner. Finfind’s report highlights the need for the relevant skills of many in start-up and early-stage businesses to be raised. They need to be equipped to build companies that: Funders need to be able to determine that the business applying for finance is bankable, meaning that it is viable and will generate future income. They also need to be able to establish whether the business can afford the funding and will be able to repay the money it is applying for. To this end, the funder needs to examine documents such as the enterprise’s business plan or project plans, its income projections, outstanding debtors, latest annual financial statements, latest value-added tax statements, up-to-date management accounts and current bank statements. Many business owners struggle to provide these documents as they find the financial record-keeping side of their business challenging, and do not have access to the necessary financial management and accounting resources needed to produce these documents. Poor financial record-keeping and the lack of up-to-date financials is not only a problem when it comes to applying for funding but is a hindrance to making sound business decisions. To improve their chances of securing funding, business owners are advised to: There is a definite disconnect in the industry between the amount of money available to SMMEs from funders, and the number of SMMEs successfully securing these funds. There are over 200 funders with more than 500 different finance products available. Business owners need to upskill themselves and get the basics in place and funding will become easier. Few funders offer support to become funding ready – the onus is on the business owner to properly prepare their application and their supporting documents and present their case to the funder. Darlene Menzies is CEO of Finfind.