Here’s what caught our attention on Friday: 1. Experts propose Eskom unbundling A task team which was appointed by President Cyril Ramaphosa has come up with proposals to fix ailing power-utility Eskom. The suggestion is to unbundle Eskom into three separate state-owned entities responsible for power generation, distribution and transmission. This could encourage efficiency and transparency. A final report is expected to be made to the president next week. 2. Davos wraps-up Team SA went to icy Davos with one core message, and that was that SA was ready for business. Besides that, a number of other matters came to the fore. Moneyweb spoke to Business Leadership SA CEO, Bonang Mohale who highlighted the dire state of parastatals (Eskom), and government institutions, the notion of encouraging inclusive growth and investment prospects. In addition, reports emerged of the President assuring the independence of the Reserve Bank and its responsibility in deciding interest rates. The hope now is for discussions to become action. We’ll be watching team SA closely, now that they’ll be returning to sunny South Africa. <a href="http://iono.fm/e/647508">Content hosted by iono.fm</a> 3. Adapt IT interim results Information, communications and technology solutions company, Adapt IT is expected to publish its interim results for December 2018 on Friday. In its 2017 interims, the company reported a 46% increase in turnover, a 22% increase in headline earnings per share and an ordinary dividend of 13.70 cents per share. The computer services firm also announced, early in January, its intention to acquire Australia-based software-services firm Wisenet Group for about R30m cash. Update to follow. 4. Leonardo to become Africa’s tallest skyscraper The Leonardo is coming to Sandton to put all other skyscrapers to shame. The building is said to be the tallest in all of Africa, measuring at least 230 meters tall. The 55-storey building is a development commissioned by the Legacy Group and Nedbank and is scheduled to be completed by the second quarter of 2019. It costs a total of R3 billion and will be located at 75 Maude Street in Sandton. Don’t break your necks while looking up at it. Read: Sandton’s R3bn Leonardo will be Africa’s tallest skyscraper 5. Rand update The rand has so far been on a positive streak, gaining against a weakening US dollar and topping most of its emerging market peers. On Friday the rand was at R13.69 at 10:22.