Last week Moneyweb published a list of the top-performing unit trusts of 2018. In the number one spot on that list was the Alexander Forbes Investments USD Feeder Fund, which delivered 18.38% for the calendar year. Read: The best and worst performing unit trusts of 2018 There was, however, a gap in the data on which this list was based. No hedge funds were included in the comparison. This was not by choice or design. It is because, despite the fact that hedge funds have been classified as collective investment schemes since April 2015, there is still no comprehensive database that allows anyone to compare their performance. This is problematic both for investors and the industry. It is worth noting that the Fairtree Protea Equity Long Short SNN Retail Hedge Fund returned 24.35% last year. According to a Twitter post, the Prime Multi Strategy Qualified Investor Hedge Fund ended the year 29.58% up. Moneyweb has not found any other collective investment schemes (CIS) that bettered this performance (the exchange-traded funds that had higher returns are single-commodity debentures rather than diversified funds). However, we cannot say with absolute certainty that no other hedge fund did better because we simply don’t have comparative numbers. The classification problem HedgeNews Africa does publish hedge fund performance figures, but it only receives numbers from around 100 of the 200 funds in the country. It will also not release individual fund returns to non-subscribers, and only provides data more than a month in arrears. Novare publishes an annual hedge fund survey, but a once-a-year retrospective look at performance has limited use. Morningstar and Profile Data, which monitor unit trust performance, are yet to include all hedge funds in their databases. According to Morningstar there are two reasons for this. The first is that even though it has been nearly three years since hedge funds were classified as collective investment schemes, the Association for Savings and Investment South Africa (Asisa) has yet to come up with fund categories for them. All unit trusts have to be categorised so that investors can compare like for like. For instance South African equity funds are clearly defined as different to global equity funds. Prescient’s Hayden Reinders, chairman of the hedge fund committee at Asisa, acknowledges that this is “taking a bit of time” but hopes it will be finalised in 2019. Sunette Mulder, senior policy advisor on hedge fund classification at Asisa, explains that the classification process only began in 2017 after the bulk of hedge funds had been moved into CIS structures. “Ultimately the role of the classification standard is to guide investors. Therefore, it must ensure that funds are grouped on a like with like basis,” Mulder explains. “The complication with hedge funds is that these funds are designed to have wide flexibility. In our initial discussions of a standard, the end result of most variations was that we would end up with the majority of funds classified within one big multi-asset category to cater for this flexibility, which would defy the object.” A draft standard was however presented to the Asisa investments board committee in November 2018. The feedback provided is now being incorporated and Mulder expects the process to be completed in the first half of this year. Read Mulder’s full explanation here. For Jean Pierre Verster, manager of the Fairtree Protea Equity Long Short SNN Retail Hedge Fund, it is disappointing that this process has taken so long, as it has proven to be a hindrance to the development of the industry. In particular, it has prevented emerging managers from being able to use their comparative performance as a way to promote their products. The lack of classification is also the reason why most linked investment service provider (Lisp) platforms, a major source of investment flows into unit trusts, do not list hedge funds yet. “The discussions at the Asisa working committee go back three years,” Verster points out. “It’s puzzling how long it has taken, and in the meantime hedge funds can’t compete effectively for investment flows from financial advisors and from the general public.” Industry buy-in The second issue that Morningstar highlighted is that not all hedge fund managers and management companies have responded to requests to submit their data. Morningstar initiated a process last year to add hedge funds to its database, but it currently receives figures from only around 80 of the 200 registered hedge funds in the country. It therefore cannot provide a comprehensive picture. Andrew Ludwig, director of distribution company Black Onyx, which specialises in promoting boutique and alternative managers, suggests that part of the problem is that hedge funds were never required to do this in the past. “Before the CIS structures, many hedge fund managers preferred to remain boutique, under the radar and very selective of their clients,” he points out. “The new dispensation that replaced fact sheets with minimum disclosure documents (MDDs) now ensures far greater transparency and every manager has to publish their data to the Financial Sector Conduct Authority (FSCA). However, many choose not share their performance figures, especially the qualified hedge fund structures reserved for highly experienced investors, as unusually high returns or volatility require detailed explanation and understanding.” The truth is that it would be in their own best interests for managers to provide this data to Morningstar and Profile Data as soon as possible, since it is effectively free marketing. Comparative performance data is the first place most people look when choosing funds. However, if not even Moneyweb is able to source comprehensive performance figures, what chance do investors have? The reality is that it’s extremely unlikely that many people are going to invest in products that they are unable to compare against each other. For the local hedge fund industry to be viewed in the same way as the unit trust industry, this must be an essential step.