A series of devastating wildfires that killed more than 100 people and scorched hundreds of thousands of acres in California over the course of two years just brought one of the nation’s largest utilities to its knees. PG&E, California’s biggest power company, filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in Northern California bankruptcy court as investigators probe whether its equipment ignited the deadliest fire in state history. The San Francisco-based company listed $51.7 billion in total debts and $71.4 billion in assets. A Chapter 11 filing allows a company to keep operating while it works out a plan to turn the business around and pay off creditors. California’s wildfires have in the past saddled utilities with millions of dollars in damages, but never have the blazes exacted such a massive financial toll from a company — creating one of the country’s largest utility bankruptcies of all time. Since November’s Camp Fire, which destroyed the town of Paradise, PG&E has seen about three-fourths of its market value wiped out, its chief executive officer leave, its bonds plunge to junk status and estimates of its fire liabilities swell to more than $30 billion. “We did not make this decision lightly, as we understand that millions of our customers rely on us and will have questions,” PG&E’s interim CEO, John R. Simon, said in a letter to customers. “The power and gas will stay on. We will continue to provide you with reliable electric and natural gas service, and that will not change as a result of this process. To be very clear, we are not ‘going out of business.”’ The only time the company has ever faced such dire financial straits was during the 2001 energy crisis, when it was forced to place its utility unit in bankruptcy protection. The utility giant’s financial crisis had some of the biggest names in the investment world working up last-minute financing packages that would have rescued the company from insolvency. A group including Paul Singer’s Elliott Management was said to have sent a proposal to PG&E backed by $4 billion of bonds that could convert into shares. At least one other group that included Ken Griffin’s Citadel and Leon Black’s Apollo Global Management was said to be pitching a rival plan.  PG&E’s demise serves to underscore the increasing vulnerability utilities face to natural disasters such as wildfires and hurricanes that are becoming more extreme. That’s especially the case in California, where state law holds utilities liable for damages even if they aren’t found to be negligent. While the company’s been cleared of fault for the deadliest of the wildfires that devastated California’s wine country in 2017, investigators have tied PG&E’s equipment to more than a dozen of the other fires. They’re looking at PG&E’s power lines as a possible ignition source for the Camp Fire, which killed 86. The company said on Tuesday that it “continues to believe that the Chapter 11 process will facilitate the orderly, fair and expeditious resolution of the liabilities that have arisen and will continue to arise” from the fires. State officials including Governor Gavin Newsom had said it would be in the state’s best interest to keep the utility healthy and financially viable. PG&E is considered a linchpin in helping achieve California’s ambitious climate goal of getting all its electricity from carbon-free sources by 2045. At the same time, Newsom chose not to take measures drastic enough to avoid a bankruptcy filing, and regulators actually began a process to evaluate whether to break up or take over the utility. A bankruptcy will probably result in higher bills for customers because it will be more expensive for PG&E to borrow the money it needs to make infrastructure investments it needs to keep the lights on. The company supplies natural gas and electricity to about 16 million people in Northern and Central California. As part of the bankruptcy, PG&E is seeking approval from the court to enter into an agreement for $5.5 billion in debtor-in-possession financing. That would free up the capital it needs to keep operations going through the Chapter 11 process. It listed J.P. Morgan Chase & Co., Bank of America, Barclays, Citigroup, BNP Paribas SA, Credit Suisse, Goldman Sachs, MUFG Union Bank and Wells Fargo & Co. acting as joint lead arrangers. “With utilities, bankruptcies take multiple years,” Kit Konolige, an analyst for Bloomberg Intelligence, said in an interview before the filing. “There is no such thing as a quick utility bankruptcy. And it creates a lot of uncertainty for everybody involved.” Here are other highlights from the bankruptcy filing: PG&E says it intends to pay suppliers in full under “normal terms.” Weil, Gotshal & Manges and Cravath, Swaine & Moore are PG&E’s legal counsel. Lazard is its investment banker and AlixPartners is the restructuring adviser. James A. Mesterharm, a managing director at AlixPartners, will serve as PG&E’s chief restructuring officer. John Boken, also a managing director at AlixPartners, will be deputy chief restructuring officer.