Exchange-traded funds (ETFs) consist of baskets of investments which, like stocks, may be bought and sold on all major stock markets. Their performance is designed to track a region, sector, theme, or ‘index’ rather than a specific company. They may consist of stocks, bonds, commodities or combinations of these. For an individual investor they are less risky than investing in a specific company. To reasonably be invested in an individual stock, one should be able to assess at least: • A company’s business performance • How its competitors are doing • How the markets it operates in are doing, and • When the best time to make the investment relative to its price and value is. These factors are difficult to interpret and monitor, even for experienced analysts (who also get decisions wrong). We too often meet investors whose returns are negatively impacted by being invested in an individual stock. This becomes almost impossible to manage and track with multiple stocks in a portfolio. The risk is balanced out in a broader exposure focused more on a region, sector or theme, which are easier to assess and monitor. In July 2018, for example, Facebook, Twitter and Netflix stocks fell more than 20% each over a two-day period. This caused significant investor distress and panic. The ETFs that represent the technology sector were down 3-4 % over the same time period, and the specific internet sector ETFs were down 8%. How much did investors really know about these three stocks? Let us also now consider the performance of Facebook shares over a longer period, including after the above event. The shares have continued to underperform, and since May 2017 are down 4% as opposed to the ETF representing the internet sector being up 36%. Since the peak in July 2018, Facebook stock is down more than double its internet sector ETF. Many investors have experienced losses and loss of investing confidence. Facebook is down more than double its internet sector ETF. Source: Tradingview.com The recent plunge in the value of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies has also highlighted the risk of being invested in single investments. The same can be said for single commodities like gold or oil. How much do individual investors really understand about their value and performance? We asked our members and investment team how they go about investing to avoid these risks. We put together a ’10 points to consider’ framework for them. Our opinion is that these investing-to-avoid-risk points are more achievable with an ETF or a portfolio of ETFs, than with a stock or group of stocks. 1. Perform dome market and investment research and analysis Access to information and advice online and via the media makes it easier to develop an investment approach in this era, enabling one to keep updated on market trends and changes on a broad level at least. Even if you do delegate some of your investments to a financial advisor or institution, keeping updated will assist you in communicating with them and thereby managing your risk. 2. Jot down a simple strategy and list objectives for your investments Write down what returns you are looking for, over what time period, and how much risk (of loss) you are prepared to tolerate? Do your investments need to generate a regular income or dividends? Would you prefer a lower volatility investment? Make sure your investments are aligned with these. Don’t get distracted by the latest fad such as ‘bitcoin’ or a share your friend likes. 3. Know your risk tolerance Investing should be enjoyable and rewarding. When it isn’t, recognise that you are probably taking on too much risk. ‘High risk, high return’ is often not true. High risk can often result in low returns or even losses. A more balanced approach that is aligned with a strategy and your objectives is preferred. 4. If you don’t understand it, don’t invest in it The less you know about an investment and understand its underlying value and performance, the less you should invest. This may assist in deciding which investments you are comfortable managing yourself, and which to delegate to financial advisors. 5. The more specific or focused an investment, the higher the risk Single-company stocks and specific commodities such as gold or a cryptocurrency are difficult to value unless one works in that industry or sector, and even then it is exceptionally difficult. Grouped investments reduce the risk. 6. Consider broader regions, sectors or themes There are many ETFs that will give an investor exposure to world markets, the broader US market, or regions outside of the US. One can invest in sectors, such as ‘US healthcare’, or themes like low volatility, or income or dividend ETFs, or combinations of these. 7. Never have a single investment allocation that can hurt you This is the important ‘Don’t have all your eggs in one basket’ golden rule. We meet too many investors who hold a very high percentage of their assets in one stock, commodity or, as happened more recently, one cryptocurrency! A stock can go to zero, whereas this is highly unlikely for a grouped ETF investment. 8. Look at the chart of an investment and do a simple analysis We continue to be surprised at how often people invest without even looking at the chart of that investment. Look at the trend of the price movement: is it up or down? Try not to purchase at the overpriced ‘top of the market’ when a simple analysis could warn against this. If you have ‘missed the boat’, don’t jump in the water! 9. Know the costs of your investments Two of the most significant impacts on a person’s investment returns are asset allocation, as discussed above, and costs. There may be fees that are payable to an advisor or the supplier of the investment product, and in some cases administration or platform fees. This is especially true if costs are a percentage of assets being managed. Calculate the actual costs in money terms per month or year, in addition to the percentage cost. 10. Phase in investments if you are unsure, and to build confidence When unsure about an investment, or where its pricing is relative to its value, it is an idea to purchase (or sell) that investment in phases. ETFs are efficient instruments, allowing one to easily adjust exposure levels. Compiled by the investment team at Advanced Exchange Traded Funds.