Here’s what caught our attention on Tuesday: 1. WEF kicks off in Davos The World Economic Forum kicks off in Davos on Tuesday and will see around 3 000 leaders from around the world gather to discuss some of today’s major global issues. South Africa’s delegation of 57 will be headed by President Cyril Ramaphosa, and is steadfast in delivering a message to investors about South Africa being ripe for investment. Speaking to Moneyweb, energy minister, Jeff Radebe said that meetings at Davos are crucial to accelerating investment in South Africa. Listen: WEF 2019: SA is ready for business (again) 2. Steinhoff restructuring update Steinhoff International published an update on the progress of its financial restructuring via Sens on Tuesday, in which it informs investors that Steinhoff Europe and Steinhoff Finance Holdings’s voluntary arrangements were both approved by ‘significant majorities of their respective creditors’ on December 14, 2018. It is additionally noted that cash flows are continuously monitored by the company and the South African business remains self-funding. Steinhoff says results for the 2017/2018 financial year are expected to be released on April 18, 2019. 3. Inquiry into the PIC’s governance commences The inquiry into alleged misconduct at the Public Investment Corporation kicked off in Pretoria on Monday. The inquiry is headed by former Supreme Court of Appeal president Lex Mpati. The first day saw the inquiry look into the processes that take place when investing as well as what goes into governance at board level.  Three PIC employees testified on Monday. The interim report is expected to be submitted to the president on February 15. Read: PIC inquiry: Corruption or sheer incompetence? 4. Computicket fined R20m The Competition Commission has issued a R20 million ‘administrative penalty’ to Computicket for abusing dominance between mid-2005 and 2010. The commission found that Computicket used exclusionary contracts with clients to keep competitors out of the market. According to TechCentral the origins of the case date back to February 2008. Read more here. 5. BHP Group operational review BHP Group issued an operational review for the half year ended December 31, 2018. The company highlights no change in production guidance for petroleum, iron ore, metallurgical coal and energy coal for the 2019 financial year. It further notes that projects under development are on track.