A federal investigation into Huawei Technologies for allegedly stealing trade secrets from US companies follows a long history of wariness and suspicion toward the Chinese telecommunications giant. It also adds to a case the US has been trying to make for years now: Huawei is a threat to national security. The investigation tied to civil suits filed in Washington state, including a 2014 case involving the theft of T-Mobile technology ratchets up pressure on a company already reeling. Last month, at the behest of the US, Canadian authorities arrested Huawei’s Chief Financial Officer Meng Wanzhou on fraud charges linked to Iran trade-sanction violations. US officials and industry executives have long harboured questions about Huawei’s ties to China’s government, and concerns about its technology have mounted in lockstep with its growing success. China’s rise as an economic and military competitor to the US have only intensified those worries. Huawei clash shows deeper US-China battle for global influence US President Donald Trump’s administration has pushed European allies to block Huawei from telecom networks, and slapped tariffs on China in part to limit its access to next-generation technologies. American lawmakers on Wednesday introduced a bipartisan bill that would ban the export of US components to Huawei and other Chinese telecom operators deemed to have violated American laws or sanctions. Huawei holds an ever-growing share of the world’s smartphone market and is a frontrunner in the race to develop next-generation wireless equipment, which critics say could enable Chinese spying efforts. The federal investigation and Meng’s detention may point to US efforts to build a public case against the company. “This is another prong in what is starting to feel like a full 360-degree assault on the business,” said Isaac Stone Fish, a senior fellow at the Asia Society in New York. “Huawei is a sustained target, and the US government is saying Huawei is a dangerous company and should be stopped,” he said. How Huawei arrest extends troubled history with US: quicktake The investigation is at an advanced stage and an indictment could come soon, according to a person familiar with the matter, who asked not to be identified because the information is private. The probe was reported earlier Wednesday by the Wall Street Journal. Emily Langlie, a spokeswoman for the US Attorney’s office in Seattle, declined to comment, as did a spokeswoman for T-Mobile. “We’re not going to comment on such reports in the press,” Chase Skinner, a spokesman for Huawei, said late Wednesday. China’s foreign ministry said Thursday the legal dispute between Huawei and T-Mobile had already been resolved, and expressed concern about the “reinvestigation.” “We seriously doubt the true motives behind it,” Hua Chunying, a spokeswoman for the ministry, told reporters in Beijing. “We hope the US can create a fair competitive environment for Chinese enterprises operating in the US” ‘Hysteria’ She also blasted US legislators for proposals to block sales of American components to Chinese telecom companies, saying it amounted to “hysteria.” “The whole world is quite clear that the US is using national machinery to suppress China’s high-tech companies,” Hua said. “This is not what the No. 1 world power should do.” The arrest of a Huawei employee in Poland last week underscored the increasing pressure on the company in the US, Europe and elsewhere over espionage concerns. In 2012, congressional committees and other US government entities criticised Huawei’s “pattern of disregard for the intellectual property rights of other entities and companies in the US” Earlier this week, Huawei’s billionaire founder Ren Zhengfei broke years of silence to dismiss US accusations that the company helps spy for China’s government. He also praised Trump for helping business by cutting taxes, and called Huawei “only a sesame seed” in the wider US-China trade fight. The company is also mired in a US criminal case alleging that CFO Meng conspired to defraud banks into unwittingly clearing transactions linked to Iran in violation of US sanctions. Meng, the daughter of Ren, was arrested in Canada on December 1 and released on bail four weeks ago. She is awaiting extradition hearings to the US while living under restrictions in her Vancouver home. Huawei isn’t the only target. For at least three White House administrations, the US has threatened to take new measures to punish China for the theft of American intellectual property. In November, the Justice Department announced its “China Initiative” designed to prioritise trade-theft cases and litigate them as quickly as possible. The chipmaker caught in US assault on China’s tech ambitions The first companies indicted under the program were state-owned Fujian Jinhua Integrated Circuit, based in Jinjiang, China, and its Taiwan-based partner United Microelectronics. The prosecution of Jinhua has already helped to hobble China’s aspirations of mass producing dynamic random access memory, or DRAM, chips. Jinhua and UMC have pleaded not guilty to the charges. Three Taiwanese nationals were charged alongside the companies with conspiring to steal trade secrets. They are scheduled to be arraigned next month. ‘Tappy’ The US probe into Huawei includes allegations by T-Mobile in a 2014 lawsuit that it stole information, according to the person familiar with the matter. According to T-Mobile, one of Huawei’s engineers visited its Bellevue, Washington, lab to see a diagnostic robot called “Tappy,” which simulated a phone user’s use. T-Mobile alleged a Huawei engineer slipped one of the robots into his laptop bag during the visit and left with it. The jury sided with T-Mobile in 2017, saying the theft resulted in Huawei making “hundreds of millions of dollars” from T-Mobile’s technology. It found that Huawei misappropriated T-Mobile’s trade secrets and breached a supply contract between the two companies, saying T-Mobile should get $4.8 million in damages.