Finance minister Tito Mboweni’s call to “think outside the box” about economic growth is akin to closing the stable door after the horse has not only bolted, but already won a race elsewhere. Mboweni picked Harvard economist Ricardo Hausmann as an advisor, knowing full well that Hausmann’s advice on productive knowledge has been flatly ignored by the ANC government since 2008. Hausmann sees productive knowledge as the key factor separating successful countries from unsuccessful ones, with a lack of productive knowledge retarding economic growth and development. From 1990 to 2003, South Africa lost 7% of its professionally qualified people – predominantly high-skilled whites. After some stability during the high-growth years of former president Thabo Mbeki and finance minister Trevor Manuel, the exodus was again triggered by the growing ineptitude of an administration that radically transformed departments and state-owned enterprises (SOEs) into little more than facades. The South African Police Service, SAA, Transnet, the National Prosecuting Authority and municipalities are among the examples where cadre deployment trumped productive knowledge. The result: Hausmann, an erstwhile cabinet minister from Venezuela, chaired the international panel of experts convened by Mbeki to advise on the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative of SA (Asgisa). Originally Agisa, the ‘shared’ was added in an attempt to counter growing criticism from Cosatu, the ANC Youth League and the SA Communist Party that Mbeki and Manuel were agents of neo-liberalism with their Growth, Employment and Redistribution (Gear) plan. Asgisa did not materially depart from Gear, but introduced a stronger emphasis on black economic empowerment (BEE): in that sense, it was the forerunner of radical economic transformation. The Hausmann panel made several far-reaching recommendations regarding growth prospects as well as impediments to growth, urging government to, inter alia, make BEE growth-compatible and do everything to stem the exodus of high-skilled whites. With heightened attention on a Great Trek of productive capital out of South Africa following a radio interview with Johann Rupert, I have highlighted just some of the 2008 conclusions and recommendations of the Hausmann panel dealing with productive knowledge: Black professionals have joined the exodus These recommendations were unpalatable for an ANC leadership convinced it was on the right radical economic transformation track by getting rid of Mbeki and his Gear approach and accelerating BEE. It is unlikely that Hausmann will find an improved situation now. In fact, matters have deteriorated concerning the availability of productive knowledge. Government, in its own White Paper on Migration (2017), acknowledges that: Considering that the 1990-2003 emigration of skills continued despite the return of stability under Mandela and Mbeki, one can easily state that at least a similar number of white professional people have left between 2004 and 2018, amounting to at least a quarter million of white professionals. The last phase of the [former president Jacob] Zuma catastrophe, as well as the ANC’s embrace of land expropriation without compensation, has led to an acceleration of skilled emigration by all race groups. With the White Paper on Migration stating that more black professionals are leaving than white professionals, one can conservatively calculate that at least 400 000 professionals have left our shores. This contributes to the shrinking percentage of high-income households, as well as removing people in high personal tax brackets as contributors to the South African Revenue Service (Sars). ANC effectively promoting growth in Mauritius at its own expense The current low-growth, high-unemployment situation is too often blamed on the ‘Gupta-isation’ of government spending. Hurtful as these body punches were, the head blows of inefficient economic policies and inefficient and counter-effective administration have had a worse effect. Some examples are: To be more precise, it is time (before the 2019 elections) to: If not, the compromised unity slate of the national and provincial ANC lists will ensure another five years of waste. By then, the racehorses will have won more coveted trophies abroad, expanding the ranks of the SA-born Patrick Soon-Shiongs [US-based surgeon, entrepreneur and philanthropist] and Elon Musks [US-based entrepreneur behind Tesla and SpaceX] and enabling countries like Mauritius and Botswana to progress while the vision of the NDP will fade into pure fiction. Johannes Wessels is director of the Economic Observatory of SA (Eosa). His article was originally published on the Eosa website here.