Here’s what caught our attention on Thursday: 1. Vodacom Q4 trading update The Vodacom Group issued a trading update for the quarter ended December 31, 2018, on Thursday, in which it highlights a 1.5% increase in group revenue to R23 billion and a 2.4% increase in service revenue to R18.9 billion. Vodacom’s local customer base increased by 5.4%, while the international customer number increased by 9.3%. The CEO, Shameel Joosub, commented that strong performance in its international operations helped offset slow growth in South Africa during the quarter. 2. Davos day two On the second day at Davos, President Rampahosa pledged to not interfere with the independence of the Reserve Bank, despite a proposal from the ANC calling to nationalise it. Ramaphosa also added that he has full confidence in the central bank governor, Lesetja Kganyago, saying that the bank is solely responsible for the setting interest rates. Read more here and here. 3. Edcon in talks for rescue funding Edgars owner, Edcon is seeking rescue funding to maintain its operations. Bloomberg is reporting that the retailer is in talks for as much as R3 billion in rescue funding. It is also being reported that the Public Investment Corporation may provide R1.8 billion to help the company which employs about 21 000 people. Other funding may come from landlords through reduced rent charges and from banks. 4. Gupta mining assets auction After eight Gupta companies, including mining assets were placed into business rescue last year, business rescue practitioners have been racing to wrap up the sales of the assets. On the auction table sits Optimum and Koornfontein coal mines, as well as a stake in the Richards Bay Coal Terminal. Bidders for the assets include Project Halo, which announced an offer of R3.6 billion for the assets last year, while the other two bidders include the Central Energy Fund and the Phakamisa Consortium. Business rescue practitioners say the bids are competitive in terms of price and differ in terms of their structuring. Read: Auction for Gupta mining assets hots up 5. Inquiry into PIC concludes on Wednesday Wednesday saw the third day of the PIC inquiry into allegations of impropriety. The head of internal audits, Lufuno Nemagovhani, took to the stand, where in his testimony he confirmed irregularities relating to the Ayo Technology Solutions investment. Nemagovhani told the inquiry that he brought discrepancies relating to the Ayo IPO to light in May 2018, and was then told that the CEO, executive head of listed investments and general manager of listed equities will take over the investigation. The CEO of the PIC resigned in November and the executive head of listed investments was suspended on Tuesday. The inquiry continues on Monday. Read more here.