The global asset management industry is experiencing a major change in the way funds are structured. Dr Vladimir Nedeljkovic, chief investment strategist at Alexander Forbes Investments, says the industry is moving from a world where large actively managed balanced funds (equity and fixed income) are losing market share, while passive and alternative investments (private equity and other unlisted assets) are increasing their share of the investment pie.  Source: BCG, Global Asset Management 2018: The Digital Metamorphosis (‘Active core’ refers to global balanced fund-type allocations and includes large cap equity, government and corporate debt and money market investments) There are two main reasons for the change, Nedeljkovic says. The overall solutions constructed from passives and alternatives are cheaper than the traditional core option and provide more flexibility to generate improved returns. He says long-term history suggests that investors have often received mediocre or passive performance for investments in large global balanced funds, while paying active fees, but that is changing. Investors want to pay for actual performance and are putting an increasing portion of their assets into investments that provide that exposure. From funds to building blocks This means that when investment products are constructed, the focus is moving away from funds to building blocks, which are used to create solutions for specific investor needs. “Components are designed or selected in such a way to be focused on the sources of excess return,” he says. But what does this mean for South Africa, where there has been a move to balanced-type funds in the wake of the global financial crisis? While local passive investments have seen significant growth – particularly over the last four years – pension funds have generally been reluctant to embrace alternative investments even though Regulation 28 of the Pension Funds Act allows them a generous allocation of up to 15% in these assets. Nedeljkovic says although there is usually a slight delay, South Africa does follow global trends. Studies show that there has generally been a very low take-up of alternatives among local pension funds, adds Gyongyi King, chief investment officer at Alexander Forbes Investments. “Our view, certainly as an investment business, is that alternative investments are a very important component of long-term investing, which is exactly what retirement funds are doing. You do get paid for time,” King says. Illiquid Alternative investments like private equity generally require investors to stay invested for at least 10 years, which makes it a very illiquid investment. But while it is an important component of the investment return, alternative investments is a specialised area, which may not be easy to access. One difference between South Africa and its global peers is that big international investors in the US and Europe are generally defined benefit funds, whereas most South African pension funds have converted to defined contribution funds. In a defined benefit environment, the employer undertakes to pay employees a pension for life based on their years of service. Thus, the employer bears most of the risk. In a defined contribution environment, most of the risk is transferred to the member, who must ensure that contributions are sufficient, that they save long enough and choose suitable underlying investments. The defined contribution environment is very different, says Janina Slawski, principal investment consultant. There is daily unit pricing and individuals leave the fund, which makes it more challenging to incorporate unlisted assets in the portfolio. Australia has large industry funds and even if people change jobs regularly, they don’t change their umbrella fund provider. “You do invest for 40 years and therefore Australia has a much higher allocation to unlisted [investments] than South African defined contribution funds.” Slawski says Alexander Forbes is considering the introduction of an unlisted capability that still allows for some liquidity, possibly through a fund of fund structure.