Tongaat Hulett is trading at a fraction of its sugar and starch operations’ replacement cost (estimated at between R10 billion and R20 billion, if not more). Assuming expropriation without compensation (EWC) doesn’t render it worthless, the group is even trading at below its land portfolio’s value (estimated at around R10 billion by some). Read: Sometimes valuation doesn’t matter as much as you think Tongaat Hulett’s net debt stood at R7.7 billion in its interim results to September 30, 2018, putting its net debt-equity ratio at a high 0.55 on equity of R14 billion. Its operating profits of R530 million barely covered its net finance costs of R430 million during this period. These ratios and balances are all assuming that the group can successfully extract cash from its operations in Zimbabwe and Mozambique, or those cash flows start to become ring-fenced and worthless to the group’s South African head office. Likewise, you can start to exclude its profit contributions from the gearing ratios … The group did report headroom borrowing facilities of a further R1.8 billion left in the period and may be able to flog some of its land portfolio in fire-sales at discounts for quick cash. All this would be materially easier if three things were not simultaneously happening: The likelihood of the group’s current interim period (to March 2019) generating positive free cash flow is low and the above draws on funding make the group’s balance sheet particularly risky right now. Irrespective of profitability, the R1.8 billion headroom could disappear quickly with R0.5 billion going into Mozambique (and possibly never coming out), Zimbabwe’s operations failing to expatriate some cash flow, sugar reporting a loss, and the group requiring capex for root-planting. Tongaat Hulett could suddenly find itself flying too close to the sun and may even need a rights issue or some other capital raising mechanism to buy itself time. It does not help that the company’s former CEO has left and we do not know who the next CEO is going to be. Read: Sugar maker Tongaat’s CEO retires Far from a certainty, and the stock is definitely cheap, but I do see a material risk in this company at this point in the cycle. Sometimes, valuation may not matter as much as some investors think. Keith McLachlan is an equity analyst (small cap specialist). This article was first published on his blog here.