South Africa’s central bank kept its benchmark repo rate unchanged as expected at 6.75% on Thursday, saying it had taken note of an improvement in the near-term inflation outlook. Governor Lesetja Kganyago said a significant drop in international oil prices and a less depreciated rand exchange rate were key drivers of the improved outlook. The rand has strengthened 1.4% against the US dollar since December last year but Kganyago said the local currency “remains sensitive to domestic growth prospects, political developments and policy settings”. Lukman Otunuga, research analyst at FXTM, says that while the rand remains impacted by South Africa’s macroeconomic conditions, external forces in the form of trade tensions and global growth fears are seen influencing the emerging market currency. “In terms of the technical picture, the USD/ZAR is likely to challenge 13.90 in the near term if a daily close above 13.83 is achieved.” The South African Reserve Bank (Sarb) now projects inflation to average 4.8% this year, down from a previous forecast of 5.5%. Inflation is seen averaging 5.3% in 2020. The bank targets inflation of between 3 and 6%. “The overall risks to the inflation outlook are assessed to be moderately on the upside. Against this backdrop, the MPC unanimously decided to keep the repurchase rate unchanged,” Kganyago said. All 27 economists surveyed by Reuters had predicted that the rate would be left unchanged, but said a hike was likely at its third meeting of the year in May. Following the November rate hike, the decision to keep the interest rate on hold is welcome, comments Samuel Seeff, chairman of Seef Property Group. “We need stability so that we can get on with rebuilding confidence and the economy.” In delivering the announcement, Kganyago noted that the domestic growth outlook remains sluggish. “Although GDP increased by 2.2% in the third quarter of 2018, private sector fixed investment remains weak and production in key sectors is volatile.” He added: “Household consumption expenditure remains constrained by weak employment growth. Over the forecast period, consumption expenditure growth is expected to remain around 2%, on the back of moderate increases in real wages and household disposable income. “Since November 2018, international developments have been the major contributor to an improved inflation outlook. Significant declines in international oil prices and a less depreciated exchange rate have been key drivers of this improved outlook.” The rand weakened slightly after the decision to 13.78 per dollar.