One thing became clear when analysing the pricing changes announced by three of the big five banks in December: the average consumer has practically zero hope of figuring out how the fees even work, never mind how to pay less for their day-to-day banking. Even on entry-level accounts, the tables of possible fees run to three pages at most banks (this is not an exaggeration). Sometimes, there are relatively arbitrary distinctions in pricing between various digital channels, while different payments or purchases (think airtime/Lotto/prepaid electricity/DStv) mostly attract different fees. Never mind trying to decipher whether the ATM you want to draw cash from is your bank’s or a third party network of “supported ATMs”, which are co-branded with your bank … Most perplexing of all is trying to decipher which transactions do or do not form part of your monthly bundled pricing. The entire premise of these bundles, particularly at the higher end, is that they offer customers a ‘single flat fee’ for all their banking. Except they don’t. Simple is possible TymeBank, which has ‘soft launched’ under the radar, has thrown the proverbial cat among the pigeons. It’s super simple pricing – almost deceptively so – is summarised in just a nine-row table, with zero charges in five of those rows. There is no monthly account fee, a first in South Africa, and the only transactions customers will pay for are: cash withdrawals at ATMs or retailers other than Pick n Pay or Boxer, debit orders, cash deposits at Pick n Pay or Boxer (the only channel that currently accepts deposits) or electronic payments to accounts at other banks. Cynics may point to the fact that Capitec’s pricing was also once this simple. But one could argue that some of the detail provided in its fee structure and flyer is, in fact, superfluous. Other banks may try to argue this same point, but their pricing is not nearly as simple. That Absa, FNB, Nedbank and Standard Bank have thus far been unable to effectively compete with Capitec in the ultra-low-cost banking account space is evidence enough. At the four ‘full service’ banks, transactions on their own channels involving cash (withdrawal or deposit) mostly attract a charge for every R100, or a fee as well as that charge per R100. This obviously prejudices either frequent, smaller value transactions or substantially larger transactions. Capitec charges flat rates for withdrawals of R6.56 at Capitec ATMs, or R8.83 at other bank ATMs. While some competitors offer a flat rate for withdrawals on their entry-level accounts, all their other accounts have the byzantine per-hundred-rand structure. It’s obvious why the pricing structures of these banks have evolved to the point they have. There are the sprawling networks of branches and ATMs – which they are rapidly cutting – and years and years of product cruft; some banks even publish two pricing guides: one for currently available products and one for those no longer on sale! And there’s the (costly) legacy behaviour they need to try and dissuade customers from, such as branch visits. Every now and then, one of the banks figures out a new (‘cleverer’) way of pricing something. And the rest rapidly catch up. That’s why their fee structures are almost indistinguishable from one another. These kinds of banks the world over are largely incapable of thinking ‘simple’. There are far too many managers, far too many political fiefdoms to protect, far too many complex IT systems, far too many customer edge cases … In the upper middle segment of the market, there exists an opportunity for one of the banks to offer true ‘unlimited’ bundled banking (including, quite literally, any and every conceivable transaction). But this is probably a non-starter. The quandary for these banks is that competition is intensifying, not abating. Bank Zero launches later this year, just as TymeBank starts hitting its straps. Perhaps the squeeze at the top end from Discovery Bank (more on this soon) will force them into action. The question is not whether the big banks like Absa, FNB, Nedbank and Standard Bank should radically overhaul their pricing … rather, the question is whether, with their inherent inertia, they even realise they should? And are they even capable of taking a fresh look at fees? * Hilton Tarrant works at YFM. He can still be contacted at hilton@moneyweb.co.za.