Ever optimistic South Africans will be watching closely when Cyril Ramaphosa delivers his state of the nation address next week, and again when finance minister Tito Mboweni presents the country’s budget at the end of the month. They will be looking for signs that the country can find its way out of the downward spiral it finds itself in. While South Africa’s president may be able to introduce some positive spin into his speech with references to the investment and job summits and selling SA Inc to the world, chances are that Mboweni will have no such luxury – numbers are more difficult to fudge. Ahead of these two events Bank of America Merrill Lynch (BoAML) has published a budget preview, called South Africa: Making Ends Meet, that has few silver linings. In a nutshell, the bank estimates that the trailing budget deficit will miss October’s medium term budget forecast by about R26 billion, which is equivalent to 0.5% of GDP. Expenditure restraints have more than offset revenue underperformance Based on the first eight months’ data, total revenue collection has underperformed by R26 billion. About half of the shortfall is likely to have been driven by personal income taxes, which should urge the government to focus on efforts to increase tax revenues through better tax administration, BoAML says. Unfortunately for consumers and businesses, a short-term fix could see adjustments to personal income tax brackets, levies and excise duties to help close the shortfall. On the positive side, non-interest spending (everything except debt service costs) has been curbed a bit. BoAML says restrictions on personnel budgets and public employment could have contributed to this.  However, any savings will be quickly absorbed and will probably be used to support the president’s economic stimulus and recovery plan and inject liquidity into cash-constrained state-owned enterprises (SOEs), Eskom in particular, conditional on their restructuring plans. Government is pushing Eskom, which is buckling under debt of R419 billion debt, to present a credible turnaround strategy before the budget presentation. A better-than-forecast budget deficit will keep the nominal main budget deficit at about R215 billion with the (small) potential to outperform. However with spending needs as pressing as they are, this is not enough to slow the rate of debt issuance, says BoAML. The bank has a bearish growth and risk premium outlook relative to the medium-term budget policy statement (MTBPS). In its bearish macro outlook, it suggests that growth will underperform and the main budget deficit will reach 4.5% in the medium term, while the public debt profile will breach 60% in 2022 – contrary to what a series of finance ministers have promised. This will necessitate fiscal consolidation down the road, to the horror of those on the left.  So what will the minister say? The minister of finance’s speech is likely to address the following issues: Without economic growth options are limited At the end of the day, without growth government is simply rearranging fewer and fewer chairs on the deck. Thus the goal – the pot of gold at the end of the rainbow – is to reallocate planned expenditure in a way that best supports growth. However, doing so is not as easy, because rather than investing in growth initiatives the fiscus is forced to use its expenditure savings to help cash-constrained SOEs. Buyers of SA government bonds and local equities, as well as rating agencies, will watch for announcements and implementation of restructuring plans for SOEs, and any progress will be well received. “A slight improvement relative to [the] MTBPS along with the use of space into [the] elections could be the Treasury’s preferred action plan,” says Ferhan Salman, an economist with BoAML. In this baseline, he says, the main budget deficit could remain at 4.3% in 2018/19 or slightly surprise to the upside. Eskom’s liquidity needs are an issue The numbers are eye-watering. For 2018/19, Eskom will secure about R20 billion in funding to plug the remaining gap in its budget. According to BoAML, Eskom’s conservative maturity profile requires about R29 billion of debt rollover for 2019/20. Assuming that Eskom is granted an 8% base tariff increase, an additional R26 billion is needed to square next fiscal year’s budget. Thus total funding needs for 2019/20 would be R55 billion, of which R13 billion is already secured. A cash injection from the central government budget to Eskom would ease its funding pressures for 2019/20. It would also be positive for the fiscus as it would reduce risks stemming from contingent liabilities, according to BoAML. What is causing white knuckles in some departments is that Eskom’s government-guaranteed debt has reached R260 billion out of the total R350 billion allocated. This still gives Eskom the room to use R90 billion in additional government guarantees. With a cash injection from the state, Eskom’s next three-year funding gap should be covered without resorting to an increase in the guarantee cap.