It is often much easier to ‘spot’ the red flags in the aftermath of a failed investment scheme or meltdown than to identify them upfront. Yet it would be a missed opportunity if one was to bury investment corpses (zombies?) without doing an autopsy. In a recent article, Moneyweb columnist Barbara Curson highlighted some similarities between the demise of furniture retailer Steinhoff and US-based health technology group Theranos. Theranos, which raised millions from private investors and venture capital firms, claimed (falsely) that it could perform a broad spectrum of blood tests from the drops of blood collected by pricking a finger. The house of cards came tumbling down when a reporter from the Wall Street Journal, John Carreyrou, exposed their claims as unreliable. In his book Bad Blood: Secrets and Lies in a Silicon Valley Startup (Alfred A Knopf, 2018), Carreyrou tells Theranos’s remarkable story. The strange –  sometimes borderline absurd – developments at the startup, and Carreyrou’s ability to weave the facts together in a captivating narrative, may leave readers thinking this is fiction. Here are some takeaways from the book (which I highly recommend by the way!). 1. A compelling story that appeals to investor emotions is an easy sell It’s human to get lost in a story, particularly if it is one with a promise to revolutionise blood testing and eliminate pain. Who wouldn’t want to be part of that? In his book Carreyrou recalls how this narrative appealed to employees with sick family members and investors with a personal health mission in particular. While this doesn’t suggest that every persuasive investment narrative is a hoax, it highlights how important it is to be aware of your emotions. We get swept up by those things that speak to our hearts – both our dreams and our fears. It is sad to see how pensioners in particular, in an effort to supplement a meagre retirement pot, often get swept up in investment scams with promises of phenomenal returns. 2. Don’t disregard the voice of dissent The book is littered with examples of employees and potential partners or investors who questioned practices at Theranos. Some were threatened, some were silenced, some got fired. In some instances, the dissenting employees were junior staff members who did not have years of institutional knowledge and just questioned basic practices. The lone voice of questioning can easily be drowned out – and, for the outside investor looking in, high-profile investors and board members can create a false impression of a great investment and a solid business. In the Theranos case, with directors having included two former US secretaries of state (George Shultz and Henry Kissinger) and an investor like Rupert Murdoch, it must have been hard to fathom that anything might be something amiss. 3. Beware the messiah CEO Even though she was young and inexperienced, Theranos founder Elizabeth Holmes was one persuasive woman – not only getting heavyweight directors and investors to join her company, but at one point also convincing her board that she shouldn’t be fired! Carreyrou highlights several instances where questions were raised about the technology or revenue projections, or where individuals asked for corroborating documents and even though these were not forthcoming, Holmes’s loyal following had so much faith in her abilities that they took her at her word. South African investors have learnt some of these lessons. At the very least, don’t take anything at face value, and don’t be afraid to question.