If you are familiar with my columns, you will know that I have been asking questions about business and government and their ability (or lack thereof) to put the people’s economic interests at the heart of their work. In 2019, the year of national elections, it is imperative that when switching the economy’s engine on, both these stakeholders anchor their visions on John Roemer’s idea of equality of opportunity towards a more egalitarian society (Equality of Opportunity by John E Roemer, Harvard University Press, 2000). Anything but will see an economy that persists in excluding most people and languishing in its gloomy state. At this beginning phase of the new year, it is tempting to focus on what to expect over the next 12 moths. The essence of this article, however, is the link between elections and intra-party politics, power relations and the balance of power – and how these elements influence ideology that informs the basis of a particular party’s government policy position. Curious tendency No surprise that I found myself reflecting on whether commentators, political observers and South Africans have collectively underestimated and overlooked the disruptive proclivities shaped by intra-party conflicts pre- and post-election. Why is this significant? In the lead-up to elections, all focus is on party politics, and how a party packages itself and sends messages to the people. Post elections, a curious tendency has been known to play out – the reconfiguring of power relations. There’s no doubt that as the campaigning heats up, South Africans will bear the loud noise of electioneering, personal politics, scandals and the grand impassioned rhetoric of empty promises that frequently prevail over economic common sense. This is an unfortunate circumstance when the economy is on its knees. It will be party politics and personalities that take centre stage. Policies will be lucky if they land a supporting role. South Africa is entering a time during which it will be beholden to the firm hand of political battles that take precedence over economic realities. Economically, little has changed for the country since the last election in 2014. Many are still trapped in the same poverty cycle and are competing against the odds with rising forecasts of unemployment. In an election year, intra-party conflicts and those between competing parties have led politicians to make decisions that fly in the face of economic rationality. South Africa can’t afford to be a state plagued by an economic sclerosis made so by politicians who are beholden to their vested interests. Intra-party conflict and competition between parties can influence political outcomes and the risk of this is that they ricochet, causing economic malfunction of the state. More deleterious is how intra-party conflict has a lasting influence on party members’ behaviour towards leaders. Authority stems from the party, as we have come to see with the ANC, where policy decisions are decentralised thereby assigning power to the collective and away from the elected leader. There have been instances that give sufficient evidence of this. A minister, though their office, takes a policy position only to be called to change it by their party because it differed with the “collective decisions”. This despite their decision being the rational one that makes economic sense. This is the type of situation that manages to arise due to the heavy price of a government that is in limbo because it is fixated  on elections. The implementation of national policies is sidelined or, in a worst-case scenario, work that is currently being carried out comes to a halt. South Africa, much like many young democracies, is faced with the problem of moving away from the visible hand of politics to a more open, liberal and competitive economy. The notion of a thriving and working economy may be derided by some politicians and their bourgeoisie communist allies. The unpalatable truth, however, is that it is the very economy they so loathe that can get poverty, inequality and unemployment figures down. If the economy is unshackled from politics and politics actually enables it to grow, this will lift many out of desperate situations. One of the great virtues of political economy is how it illuminates the hidden and unseen perils of states led by parties that are so engrossed in intra-party conflict that they barely pay attention to how it is negatively affecting the economy. The tyranny of the throttlehold of politics in postcolonial Africa has shown how it can overpower economic realities – including failing to see and prepare for how interconnected the global economy is. South Africa’s national policies have failed to pay attention to this interconnectedness due to parties being inward-looking and engaged in their own internal conflicts. Knowingly or not, during an election year political parties in South Africa are responsible for the way world markets react to the country. Like it or not, the complexities that come with globalisation and interconnected macroeconomics means a party that wishes to lead South Africa into economic prosperity must stop being consumed by intra-party conflicts and must most certainly have policies that are looking beyond our shores.