‘Twas the week before Christmas after the Brits had been back to the polls In a year when Eskom shed more load and blamed the darkness on wet coals. The tinsel came out and the lights went up and we wailed “the year has flown” And climate change made the month of July the hottest the world has ever known. Emperor Akihito didn’t feel that well and quit Japan’s top royal position, The first time in two centuries that an abdication was the way of transition.  Narendra Modi won a second term and Theresa May lost her Brexit refrain And Zelensky advanced from comedian to become president of the Ukraine. In Hong Kong a million protested as Mainland China looked to extend its reach And House Democrats unveiled two articles on which they sought to Trump impeach. The Potus liked to travel and Queen Liz made him a tea from Twining And with Kim Jong-un in North Korea the two had to listen to each other’s whining.  After seven years in the Ecuadorian Embassy Julian Assange was dragged to jail And Boris Johnson promised the British folk that there’d be a Brexit without fail. The Papal visit to the Arabian Peninsula was the first one ever in our time And seeing the first-ever image of a black hole was celestially sublime. After stopping for three decades Japan resumed commercial hunting of whales And the very last Volkswagen Beetle rolled of the production line to final sales.  Qatar pulled out of Opec and China landed on the dark side of the moon And El Chapo’s lengthy sentence means he won’t see daylight anytime soon. The UK parliament was prorogued and Archie Windsor was the next royal born And Thomas Cook collapsed in a heap to leave many holiday-makers forlorn. Ayer’s Rock closed to the public and Greta Thunberg was ‘Person of the Year’ Which irked the previous winner who’s still mulling his political career.  Disasters seemed aplenty and victims numbered children, men and wives With the Brazilian dam collapsing and Cyclone Idai claiming Mozambican lives. Temperatures grew and fires raged on as climate change raised Mother Nature’s ire With the Amazon burning, Shuri Castle razed and Notre Dame losing roof and spire. Venice floods submerged St Mark’s famous square and tourist visits were confounded And a Boeing Max went down again and this time the global fleet was grounded.  The cruel, crazy, beautiful world lost its Great Heart, Le Zulu Blanc And South Africa’s investment grade rating teetered on the edge of junk. The US yield curve slope inverted and the hopes of growth seemed to dissipate But the Federal Reserve stood up to the plate and thrice cut the Fed Funds rate. Trade talk news switched between good and bad and market reaction was never minor With a ‘Phase one’ deal the hope of all to end the tariff war between the US and China.  Tiger Woods donned a Master’s jacket for the fifth time in his golfing life And Kipchoge ran his sub-two marathon straight into the arms of his loving wife. The Avenger’s Endgame broke all records when it played on the world’s big screens And Djokovic retained his Wimbledon title amidst adoring Centre Court screams. The Bokke became champions in a rugby tournament that was always tough And our lasting memory of that great event will always be the Speedo worn by Faf.  The Ndlovu Youth Choir showed their talent and the Spar Proteas got fourth in the cup But our cricketers left us pondering what on earth was really up? Champion trainer Terrence Millard left us as a six-time winner of the Durban July purse With our latest joy from Ms Tunzi, a beautiful and eloquent new Miss Universe. Game of Thrones writers lost the finale plot and should have fallen on Valyrian swords But voters got the story right when Sho Madjozi won the BET awards.  The markets turned out positive but it was a very rough and bumpy ride With resources in the ascendancy and local economy shares on the slide. Naspers spawned a European internet play with a Prosus listing in Amsterdam And Tongaat was suspended after years of results were shown to be a sham. The two Sasol chiefs gave up their posts as Lake Charles costs ran away But amongst the SA Inc stocks, Clicks showed up as a sunshine ray.  Losing heart is all too easy when we think of SAA, Eskom and Prasa And gender-based violence and xenophobia are a scourge akin to disaster. But the journey to getting our rainbow back doesn’t rest on a president alone Because it’s up to every single one of us to set the respectful and loving tone.  Clement Clarke Moore’s poetic story took a beating in this laboured rhyme So the last words will be roughly his, as they always are at this time: “But I heard him exclaim, ‘ere he drove out of sight, A great festive season to all, and to all a good-night.” (With apologies to Clement Clarke Moore) Craig Pheiffer is chief investment strategist at Absa Stockbrokers and Portfolio Management.