Low GDP growth and a struggling economy has resulted in many South African companies resorting to retrenchment as they try to trim costs wherever they can to stay profitable. Investec chief economist Annabel Bishop says GDP growth in 2020 will likely be closer to 1% than 1.5% year on year. In the past month, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has warned that it projects South Africa’s “economic growth to remain sluggish in 2020 — below population growth for the sixth consecutive year … With low growth and low job creation, the increasing labour force is projected to exacerbate unemployment pressures, poverty, and inequality.” This sets the scene for a bleak economic outlook as we head into the new year. In the last year alone, more than 20 000 South Africans have been retrenched and this is set to increase next year. Read: Banks continue quietly cutting staff If you have managed to retain your job, it might well be time to consider how you can retrench-proof your finances so that you have a financial cushion if you happen to receive a retrenchment letter from your employer. Read: How to deal with your home loan when you get retrenched Retrenchment insurance The good news is that you can take out retrenchment insurance when you take out an income protection policy, or you can ask your insurer to include it as an add-on when you take out life insurance. Retrenchment insurance usually pays out 75% of your taxable salary for up to six months. In order to claim on retrenchment insurance, you must prove that your retrenchment was in line with labour law requirements. This means that your retrenchment must be subject to certain conditions, for example, adverse business conditions, a restructuring within the business or the introduction of new technology. The fine print: exclusions When you take out any new financial services product, you should always read the fine print to ensure that you understand the exclusions on the policy. Most retrenchment insurance policies will have similar exclusions. You cannot claim if: There are also certain conditions you must satisfy before you can claim. These include a waiting period, which may vary from one month to six months, depending on your insurer. The waiting period commences from the date you receive your final salary. You must be permanently employed for at least a year with the same employer before you claim. Which companies offer retrenchment insurance? Kresantha Pillay, lead specialist: lifestyle protector at Liberty Group, says the company launched a retrenchment insurance product, the Liberty Retrenchment Protector, in 2011. Pillay notes that the Liberty Retrenchment Protector is one of the few benefits in the market that is not linked to a life cover policy. “The payout is not linked to your salary but rather on the amount of cover taken out. You can select to have inflation-linked premiums where your premium and cover amount increase each year, or you can choose a level premium.” In terms of the premium payable, she provided the following example, adding that premiums will vary between individuals, depending on their individual profile. A 30-year-old male, non-smoker, employed as an actuary with an after-tax income of R30 000 per month who has taken out R1 million life cover and opted to have the maximum retrenchment cover for 75% of his after-tax income, would pay a R234 monthly premium. Other forms of retrenchment assistance Bleak economic outlook Innocent Dutiro, former CEO of workplace solutions company Adcorp, notes that the economy’s labour intensity has been dropping steadily. He says that in the 25 years prior to 1995, a percentage point of economic growth was associated with a 1.3% increase in employment. In the 25 years since 1995, a percentage point of economic growth has been associated with a far lower 0.2% increase in employment. “To put it another way, in 1995, it took 7.3 workers to produce R1 million of output. Today, it takes 4.4 workers to produce the inflation-adjusted equivalent – a drop in the economy’s labour intensity of 39.7%. “Economic growth is certainly helpful for employment growth, but it is not a panacea.”