South Africa’s police arrested two senior ex-managers at the state electricity company and a number of other suspects over allegations of fraud, corruption and money laundering at the Kusile power plant. Abram Masango, the former head of group capital at Eskom and France Hlakudi, a former senior manager for group capital at the utility appeared in court on Thursday, according to Hangwani Mulaudzi, a spokesman for the Hawks’ Serious Commercial Crime Investigation team, a special unit of the police. Tony Trindade, chief executive officer of Tubular Construction Project and Hudson Kgomoeswana are also among the accused. The four were granted bail of R300 000 each, according to TimesLive. Thursday’s arrests are the first by judicial authorities carrying out President Cyril Ramaphosa’s pledge to end corruption that’s stalled growth in Africa’s biggest economy. The debt-laden utility has turned to the government for bailouts to remain solvent as it confronts massive cost overruns at two partially completed plants – Kusile and Medupi – and its other ageing facilities struggle to produce enough power to meet demand. “Investigations began when suspicions were raised into the construction of two large projects at Medupi and Kusile power stations,” according to a joint statement by the Hawks and and the National Prosecuting Authority. “There was apparent gross manipulation of contractual agreements between contractors, Eskom employees and third parties at Kusile.” ‘Conflict of interest’ The suspects are being investigated for alleged fraud, money laundering and corruption. Kusile, Eskom’s newest facility, remains under construction after years of delays and cost overruns. The investigations found that contracts were manipulated by senior managers through Eskom’s procurement system, “descoping of the contract at Kusile without justification and with conflict of interest by Eskom employees,” the agencies said. A contract for R745 million was approved in 2015 for the construction of two air-cooled condenser units at Kusile and “it’s alleged that the appointed companies, other related entities and individuals shared approximately R30 million amongst themselves,” they said. The government’s Special Investigating Unit said in a statement that it’s busy with a “much wider” probe that involves four main contractors and numerous sub-contractors at Kusile. The SIU said that it found through its own investigation that some companies were “used as conduits for corrupt payments” to Eskom managers. Read: Cost to fix Medupi, Kusile balloons to R8bn The other side of the messy R8bn Medupi, Kusile story Two mammoth power plants are sinking Eskom and South Africa