The competition watchdog drew a line in the sand on Monday when it released its final Data Market Inquiry Report, with far-reaching recommendations such as that the big two mobile network providers Vodacom and MTN reduce their prices. Vodacom was the first to respond, saying the Competition Commission had “downplayed” the importance of the delayed release of spectrum on data prices. It also highlighted the different findings reached by the commission and the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa (Icasa) in its preliminary discussion document. While the commission has found that South African data prices are quite expensive when compared with other African countries and global counterparts, Icasa’s preliminary findings say they are neither high nor low but just in the middle. On Wednesday MTN was even blunter. “We respectfully disagree with the analysis and recommendations contained in the summary report and, as we study the full report, will continue to engage constructively and vigorously defend against overbroad and intrusive recommendations,” said MTN in a Sens announcement. One of the “overboard and intrusive” recommendations includes dropping data prices by between 30% and 50% in the next two months. Like Vodacom, MTN says that it has significantly reduced the effective price of data and that the critical barrier to reducing costs even further is limited spectrum availability. “Radio spectrum is the digital highway upon which we depend to carry increasing mobile data at a more cost-effective price,” it said. “This is acutely felt in South Africa that has among the lowest spectrum allocation in all our MTN markets. The release of new spectrum in this market will greatly assist our ability to service more customers with more data traffic.” Read: Our prices will tumble when we get more spectrum: MTN Spectrum is important because it will allow operators to offer high-speed data services that travel vast distances and penetrate walls. The spectrum they currently use allows them to do this but it also requires that they put their base stations closer together – at a higher cost. So how did we get here? The question of spectrum has been in limbo for some 10 years and has outlasted eight communications ministers. Here is a timeline of significant events Ultimately, as mentioned by the commission, the use of the auctioned spectrum will depend on the acceleration of digital migration, which has also been hamstrung for years. Sources: Icasa November 2019 Information Memorandum and www.itweb.co.za