Accelerate Property Fund, which has seen its share price lose more than 50% of its value this year, is forecasting a double-digit fall in dividends of up to 15% for its full year to March 2020. This follows the fund reporting a 41% decline in dividends per share (DPS) for its half-year to September on Wednesday. Its share price lost more than 18% on the day, closing at R1.39 following the release of its latest results. The part-owner of Johannesburg’s redeveloped Fourways Mall – which is currently the largest shopping centre in SA, at 178 000m2 – declared interim DPS of 16.12 cents. For the corresponding half-year, it declared dividends of 27.26 cents per share. Fourways Mall, which is part owned by Accelerate Property Fund and is SA’s largest shopping centre. Picture: Supplied Accelerate said in its JSE Sens results announcement that the South African economic environment remains challenging. The property fund’s directors declined to comment to Moneyweb due to “back-to-back meetings with analysts” on Wednesday. Read: Another blow for Georgiou However, in its Sens statement it noted: “Unfavourable economic conditions continue to weigh heavily on property fundamentals, and, in our view, the property sector will remain under pressure.” Accelerate has had to reduce rentals and increase incentives such as “rent-free periods” in order to retain tenants. “This trend continues to put pressure on income; however, it positions the fund well for the future,” it said. Read: Investors may receive a fraction of their original HS investments The fund added that “despite a number of ongoing initiatives” to reduce costs and fill vacant space, it has experienced considerable income pressure on several fronts, including: As a result, it said revenue for the period came in at R564 million, down from R603 million in 2018. However, Accelerate noted that it has managed to reduce vacancies to 8.54%, compared to 9% at its full-year to March. The fund noted that at the end of its half-year to September 30, its investment property portfolio was valued at R12.2 billion. This excludes its R908 million “equalisation acquisition” of a share in the larger redeveloped Fourways Mall, which came into its portfolio post its half-year. Read: Will Fourways Mall deliver dividends for Accelerate? “The capital requirements relating to the equalisation of the Fourways Mall, the biggest mall in South Africa, in the current economic climate have necessitated that different cost-effective ways of financing this acquisition be considered,” it said. “It is not feasible for the fund to finance this equalisation price with equity which is currently trading at a substantial discount to net asset value, as this cost is prohibitive, and not to the best interests of the company or shareholders. “The equalisation price of R908 million was partially debt-funded for R700 million, the balance was paid against the vendor loan account. There is an adjustment mechanism, whereby the purchase price may increase by approximately R230 million, in which case the balance of the purchase price may be set-off against the remaining vendor loan balance, so no further debt will be incurred by APF [Accelerate Property Fund],” it noted. Accelerate’s “equalisation acquisition” of Fourways Mall has increased its loan-to-value ratio to 42% post its half year. The group is disposing of several non-core assets to bring down its gearing below 40%. Some R500 million in non-core properties were disposed during the half-year, with another R400 million in assets up for sale.   