That Prosus increased its offer for Just Eat to £8 per share raises two all-important questions: Is Just Eat really worth £5.5 billion? And will Just Eat give investors a decent return over the next few years if they buy shares at the current price? These questions are surely dogging Just Eat shareholders who must choose between the cash offer from Prosus and a share swap and cash offer from Takeaway.com. Prosus and Naspers shareholders are probably considering the questions too, together with the nagging thought that R102 billion is a lot of money. Read: Prosus placing its hope on hungry homebodies Prosus management obviously believes that food delivery is the next big business globally and has stated its strategy to position itself as the biggest player in what it terms a world-changing industry. Read: Prosus really wants Just Eat The figures seem to bear out their argument. All the players in the industry quote astounding figures of how many orders they receive and deliver – Just Eat said it received nearly 124 million orders in the first half of 2019 and earned revenue of £465 million. Read: Prosus increases its offer for Just Eat, with a new twist A research report by global management consultant McKinsey & Company conducted over six months in 16 countries estimates that the market for food delivery was worth around €83 billion in 2016. Although the authors ventured the opinion that the market for food delivery was reaching maturity in several countries, they still expected steady growth. An interesting finding of their research is that they found that ordering platforms are “sticky”. This means that customers tend to stick to a specific online or mobile ordering platform once they signed up, making it difficult for competitors to draw them away to a new platform. In a sense, the only way to gain a lot of customers quickly is to buy them. Prosus points out that its latest offer is at a 36% premium to the price that Just Eat shares traded at the day before it launched its offer and that the price of Just Eat shares already included the premium offered by Takeaway.com at that time. In fact, Just Eat shareholders have done pretty well since its listing on the London Stock Exchange in 2014. The offer of £8 per share is some 176% higher than the closing price of £2.90 at the end of its first trading day. Has the opportunity already passed? If food delivery is to be the next big thing, investors who bought into Just Eat saw it already in 2014 and have benefitted handsomely since. However, this still leaves them with the question of whether they should accept the Prosus or Takeaway.com offer. Prosus offers an exit at an attractive price, while Takeaway.com is hoping to entice them with the promise of further strong growth by rolling their catchy brands – such as SkipTheDishes, Menulog, City Pantry, Fillmybelly, Hungryhouse, Eatcity and Don’t Cook – into Takeaway.com. The Prosus offer might look tempting to Just Eat shareholders who took a hard look at Just Eat’s latest results. The figures for the six months to June lend credibility to the view that the industry is reaching maturity with future growth largely dependent on continued investment in building service capability and marketing spend. While revenue continued to show strong growth, expenses increased at a faster rate and profit declined significantly. Just Eat reported an increase of around 30% in revenue to £465 million, but operating profit nearly halved to £23.7 million compared to the £45.7 million in the first six months of the previous financial year. Profit before tax fell 98% to only £0.8 million, which management said reflected planned investments in own delivery infrastructure and investments into the Latin American iFood. Losses Losses in associated companies, interest and tax reduced the operating profit to a loss of £8.8 million compared to a profit of £36.2 million in the first half of 2018. The cash flow statement shows that Just Eat is running on debt. While net cash flow from operating activities was healthy at £39 million (down from £56 million in the comparable period), Just Eat invested £154 million to run and grow the business. Net cash used in investing activities exceeded £500 million over the last 18 months, forcing Just Eat to raise debt of nearly £328 million over the same period. Just Eat management tried to put a positive spin on the results, adjusting the figures to exclude loss-making subsidiaries. It calculated alternative performance measures to exclude the losses from its associates in Brazil and Mexico on the basis that Just Eat management does not have management control of these entities. Read: Is Prosus in trouble for selling Takeaway.com shares? The notes to the interim results define this adjusted earnings per share as profit attributable to equity shareholders before the results of associates, long-term employee incentive costs, foreign exchange gains and losses, other gains and losses, amortisation of acquired intangible assets and excluding the consolidated results (losses) from Mexico. These calculations improve the earnings per share from a loss of 0.8 pence to a positive figure of 5.7 pence. But even these calculations showed that Just Eat did not have a good first half with earnings per share falling 36% compared to the first half of 2018. On a per share basis, the offer price (and current ruling market price) of £8 represents a price-earnings (PE) ratio of 70 times, based on the better “alternative performance measurement” figure (annualised). However, you have to include ugly kids on the family photograph too. Including the losses of the associate companies as per reporting principles yields earnings per share of only 5.8 pence for the past 12 months. This puts Just Eat on a PE of 138 times, and makes taking the cash very tempting. Alternatively, investors can ask themselves if they are willing to buy Just Eat shares on a PE of 138 times to help them to reach a decision. In addition, the short-term prospects for Just Eat in the event of shareholders choosing to go with Takeaway.com seem uncertain. The share prices of both Just Eat and Takeaway.com are probably reflecting the excitement over the corporate activity and might fall back once the deal is finalised. Prosus mentions in the latest set of offer documents that stock exchange rules allow it to acquire shares in the open market at up to the offer price of £8 and Just Eat shareholders can call its brokers to sell their shares immediately. Alternatively, the last date of acceptance of the offer has been extended to January 10, 2020. Takeaway.com said in its latest communication to shareholders that it has received acceptances from shareholders owning 41% of Just Eat and is confident it can reach its limit of 50% to secure the deal. 