Here’s what caught our attention on Wednesday: 1. PIC asked to recover Ayo funds The Public Investment Corp, Africa’s largest money manager, has received a compliance notice from the Companies and Intellectual Property Commission asking it to recover the capital investment of R4.3 billion it invested in Ayo Technology Solutions. The PIC has been given 15 days, from the date it was served the notice (February 21) to recover the money. The PIC has appointed a legal team to help it recover the R4.3 billion it had invested in the technology firm. <a href="http://iono.fm/e/660001">Content hosted by iono.fm</a> 2. MultiChoice listing After unbundling from media giant Naspers, MultiChoice is set to list on the JSE under the broadcasting and entertainment sector on Wednesday. According to Reuters, MultiChoice’s market capitalisation exceeded R42 billion upon listing, as shares opened at R95.50 each. Naspers shareholders will automatically obtain MultiChoice shares upon listing. Read more here. 3. State capture inquiry to hear Glencore CEO testimony The Zondo Commission continues on Wednesday and is expected to dive into the details relating to Glencore’s involvement with Gupta-owned coal mining company, Tegeta and its coal supply deal with Eskom. Glencore’s former CEO Clinton Ephron is expected to take to the stand to iron out the details. 4. Wiese loosens grip on Shoprite Billionaire investor, Christo Wiese will be selling his voting rights, which are held as deferred shares, back to Shoprite. Moneyweb is reporting that the decision comes as the retailer sees to simplify the control structure and give more power to shareholders. The deferred shares carry 32.3% of voting rights at Shoprite and are held by Wiese’s investment business, Thibault Square Financial Services. Read: Wiese to lose control of Shoprite 5. Rand update The rand has lost some of its shine this week after strengthening last week on a strong dollar. On Wednesday, the rand was at R13.86 to the dollar at 9:42. Read: Rand’s undeserved rally gives SA some breathing space