Here’s what caught our attention on Thursday: 1. It’s Sona day If you have plans tonight, you ought to cancel them, as the president will be delivering his second State of the Nation Address on Thursday. A lot is expected on the agenda, including Eskom, education and employment. South Africans are hoping to see the fruits of the promises made last year, as well as how the president plans to sell himself as election pressure mounts on the ANC. Get your popcorn ready. We’re in a for something big, maybe. Read: SA’s top priority: ethical leadership <a href="http://iono.fm/e/652354">Content hosted by iono.fm</a> 2. The final day of the Mining Indaba Four days of talking mining, manufacturing, potential deals and mergers and saving the industry as a whole. The Mining Indaba concludes on Thursday, and some of the notable developments include a potential revamp of the dwindling gold sector following Barrick Gold’s mega deal and the announcement of the world’s first fully-automated mine. Syama mine is located in Mali and is operated by driverless, laser-guided vehicles, which collect ore below surface and bring it back up to be crushed, milled and processed. Could this be the mine of the future? Read more here. <a href="http://iono.fm/e/652351">Content hosted by iono.fm</a> 3. David Jones CEO resigns Australian retailer, David Jones, which is a subsidiary of South Africa’s Woolworths announced the resignation of its CEO on Thursday. David Thomas will be resigning as CEO due to ‘personal reasons’ according to a statement on Sens. The David Jones business gave Woolworths a run for its money last year due to impairment costs and a write-down on its value. Woolworths CEO, Ian Moir will work with David Jones management until a replacement is found. 4. ArcelorMittal reports profit growth Steel manufacturing company, ArcelorMittal is reporting a 16% increase in revenue to R45.27 billion for the year ended December 31, 2018. Ebitda improved to R3.60 billion, from a loss of R315 million in 2017. The company says its results were positively impacted by higher realised steel prices on the back of strong international prices and higher sales volumes. No dividend was declared for the period. 5. Eskom workers stage protest at HQ The proposal to split Eskom into three entities is not sitting well with Eskom employees. The workers staged a protest outside Eskom’s head office in Megawatt Park on Wednesday, to express their concerns relating to the proposed split up as well as potential job cuts. The workers were awaiting a briefing from management, but Reuters is reporting that they were told to wait for the plans to be announced during Thursday’s State of the Nation Address. We told you, cancel your plans. Also read: The other side of the messy R8bn Medupi, Kusile story