There is – seemingly – a storm brewing at Woolworths’ Australian operations. Whether it will blow over or escalate into a hurricane will be seen (what’s not likely is that it’s a storm in a teacup). On Thursday, the retailer announced the resignation of David Thomas, the CEO of David Jones, the department store chain it bought in 2014. The terse 53-word statement said Thomas had “resigned for personal reasons”; it gave no indication of whether he would leave immediately. Normally these pieces of corporate verbiage pay some sort of tribute to the departing executive and thank them for their service. The Woolies statement did not. Read: Woolworths Australia CEO exit shows unit’s lack of stability Thomas was promoted to head the David Jones business from September 2017 after its CEO John Dixon was elevated to the newly created position of CEO for Australasia. The group justified this additional level of management, saying “the creation of a single regional structure is the logical next step for our business”. Dixon joined the group’s board ahead of assuming the regional CEO position. Less than nine months later this unravelled, with Dixon’s position being “discontinued” immediately following what the group termed a “strategic cost review”. Since May last year, David Jones’s Thomas and Country Road Group CEO Scott Fyfe reported directly to Woolworths group CEO Ian Moir. Now that Thomas is out, Moir will “work directly with the David Jones management team in the interim”. Two working days later, Woolworths announced the completely unexpected departure of independent non-executive directors Gail Kelly and Patrick Allaway, both Australian, with immediate effect. This is highly unusual. Non-executive directors do not suddenly resign (both were reappointed with 90%-plus support at the retailer’s November AGM). And they certainly do not resign in concert. And, in potentially sensitive departures like this – where the market could infer the wrong message – the actual resignation dates and announcements are often carefully stage-managed. Kelly, a South-African born Australian banker, joined the board in October 2015. Allaway, appointed in December 2014, has over 30 years’ experience in finance and banking. Woolworths no longer has any Australian directors on its board (with the exception of Moir). It is likely that this, and the events of last week, are not unrelated. Shareholders are surely wondering if there was a battle at board level. Was there such a severe disagreement about governance or strategy or an appointment (or forcing out, as it may be) that both Australian directors felt compelled to resign? Or was it something else entirely? What is clear is that all is not well at WHL Australia. For shareholders, having Moir spend an increasing portion of his time running David Jones is probably not the desired outcome. The market perception is that the David Jones turnaround will labour on forever. Everyone already accepts that Woolworths overpaid for the asset. However, comparable store sales at David Jones are up after a tough 2017. In the six months to June (its fiscal second-half), sales were up 2.7% at existing stores. In the run-up to the festive season (26 weeks to December 23), comparable sales were up 0.9%. But there are far, far bigger problems in its home market. For the year to June 24, Woolworths Fashion, Beauty and Home (previously ‘clothing’) reported comparable store sales that were down 4.1%. In the run-up to Christmas this had “recovered” to a drop of just 2.4%. Fashion, Beauty, Home Comparable stores Sales Price movement Comp stores, excl. inflation 26 weeks to December 23, 2018 -2.4% -2% 1.7% -4.1% 52 weeks to June 24, 2018 -4.1% -1.5% 0.8% -4.9% 26 weeks to December 24, 2017 -3.4% -0.2% 0.7% -4.1% 52 weeks to June 25, 2017 -0.9% 1.4% 6.6% -7.5% 26 weeks to December 25, 2016 1.2% 3.5% 7.3% -6.1% Yes, the consumer environment is the toughest it’s been in years, unsurprising for an economy at stall-speed. But this is not a business in rude health. And it’s certainly not as ‘bulletproof’ as it once was. The group has admitted to “poor execution in clothing”, with this being particularly pronounced in womenswear last year. It rolled out and then rapidly rolled back the David Jones private label in South Africa. The move to replace what you would recognise as Woolworths’s ‘classic’ range fell completely flat. Read: The Woolworths fashion mea culpa Add to this a number of high-profile mistakes – the latest being a second accusation of product copying (that of a type of latte) following on from the recent Ubuntu Baba baby carrier saga, as well as a wholly tone-deaf Valentine’s Day marketing campaign – and it is clear there are big problems in the core Woolworths business. Read: Oops! Woolworth does it again Moir should be focusing a lot more time and attention on the South African clothing business. The seasoned retailer doesn’t have that right now, not with whatever’s happening in Australia. (It certainly wouldn’t be a surprise to have more news on that front in the coming weeks …) Moir has got to be thankful his food strategy has paid off handsomely, or he might have been out a while ago. Hilton Tarrant works at YFM. He can still be contacted at hilton@moneyweb.co.za.