In 2002 S&P Dow Jones Indices published the first S&P Indices Versus Active (Spiva) scorecard. It was a piece of analysis that compared the returns of active fund managers in the US against a broad market benchmark. It wasn’t exactly a revolutionary piece of research, but it did introduce a new level of clarity to the argument for the use of index funds. Back in 2002, and consistently ever since, Spiva has showed that very few active managers are able to outperform a broad market index over any time period, either short-term or long-term, and even fewer can do so consistently. “Back then nobody had done this sort of research, except at academic level,” explains Alex Matturri, CEO of S&P Dow Jones Indices (SPDJI). “We weren’t the first to look at fund manager performance against the index, but we did it on a more consistent basis and made it available to the public.” Market efficiency SPDJI did of course already have a good idea of what they were likely to find. It had been known for some time that it was extremely difficult to beat the market. Famously, Jack Bogle, who went on to found Vanguard, had come to this conclusion in his senior thesis at Princeton University in 1951. His research found that mutual funds (or unit trusts) “may make no claim to superiority over the market averages”. What SPDJI did find surprising, however, was that this was a global phenomenon, and that it was persistent. The opportunity for active managers to outperform is higher in inefficient markets, but there just aren’t that many of these any more. “The view back then was that large cap US equities were very efficient, but there were inefficiencies in small caps or emerging markets,” explains Matturri. “What we found, however, is that the difficulty in beating the index is pretty broad-based. You won’t find it in every market over every period, but you do see this persistence globally. It’s rare that you see a market where active fund managers demonstrate persistent outperformance.” That doesn’t mean that good active managers don’t exist. “We don’t say that there aren’t good managers out there,” Matturri says. “There are some excellent mangers and some have persistence. It’s just very hard to find them, and even harder to find them on a consistent basis.” The impact of technology A large part of the reason for this is that markets globally have become significantly more efficient in the past few decades. “Technology has changed markets tremendously,” says Matturri. “Information is readily available to everyone, all at once. When I got into the investment business in the mid 1980s, information was disseminated by phone calls. I was a research analyst at a decent-sized bank, but I wasn’t the first phone call when news came out. That went to the people that made the most commission for the stockbroker.” In a digital world, everyone now has access to the same information, at the same time. Regulation in many countries has also forced companies to disclose any material information to the entire market. “Twenty years ago a corporate treasurer could tell something to a particular analyst and not tell everyone else,” says Matturri. “That doesn’t happen any more. Dissemination of information is almost instantaneous now.” The active advantage? This makes it very difficult for any active fund manager to have a competitive advantage. On top of this, there has been huge growth in the number of fund managers trying to extract value from the market. As Charles Ellis, author of Winning the Loser’s Game and The Index Revolution, notes, this just compounds the challenge. “If you want to find a really good active manager, that is easy,” Ellis contends. “There are lots of them who are really smart, very articulate, sincere in their convictions, and proud of the talented people that they have working in their business. The only problem is it’s easy because there are so many of them, and that makes it hard for any of them to be visibly, noticeably different.” Read: It’s not that active managers have failed As Matturri notes, there are things an investor can look for that might help them identify really good active managers. “Managers that do well today are the ones that are able to cut through all the market noise, and really understand the strategies of the companies they invest in,” he argues. “They are able to focus on the long term and look through the quarter-to-quarter, minute-to-minute noise.” Taking this long term view does however mean that there will have to be periods when they underperform in the short term. There will be times when their strategies are not rewarded. And this only makes it more difficult for investors to identify them. “It’s hard for the average investor to find that manager at the right time in the cycle, because persistence data shows that no one stays at the top forever,” says Matturri. “It is, mathematically, almost impossible.”