Emerging markets are becoming more sensitive to the slings and arrows of the US-China trade dispute just as talks between the two sides enter their most crucial phase. President Donald Trump said Sunday he’ll extend a deadline to raise tariffs on Chinese goods until he can meet Chinese President Xi Jinping, spurring gains in the yuan. With representatives of the two governments still haggling over a deal that would ensure Beijing lives up to its promise not to depreciate the yuan, the tendency of developing-nation currencies to shadow the dollar-yuan exchange rate is back near its highest since July. Trump said the US and China have made “substantial progress” in the latest round of talks in Washington, which will help appease investors worried that an escalation of the trade war will derail global growth. This week is also due to serve up a second meeting between the US President and North Korean leader Kim Jong Un, a rate decision in South Korea and gross-domestic-product reports from Brazil, India and Mexico. Not forgetting, of course, the result of the delayed election in Nigeria.  “It appears that progress is being made and in this respect it ought to buoy EM assets into this week,” said Mitul Kotecha, a senior emerging-markets strategist at TD Securities in Singapore. “Markets have been anticipating some sort of a deal though there has been concern about structural issues.” Here’s what to watch for in emerging markets this week: Nigerian officials are preparing to announce which of the two main candidates, the incumbent Muhammadu Buhari and Atiku Abubakar, won Saturday’s election; analysts were more or less split down the middle over who would win Wall Street banks such as Citigroup Inc. say Nigerian equities and bonds will probably rally if Abubakar wins. Since Buhari came to office, Nigeria’s stock market has been the world’s worst performer, losing about half its value in dollar terms. Trump and North Korean leader Kim will hold their second meeting on February 27-28 in Vietnam The dismantlement of the Yongbyon Nuclear Scientific Research Center, a complex located in the mountains north of Pyongyang, has emerged in recent months as a potential outcome from the summit South Korea’s sovereign bond risk has fallen to an 11-year low on optimism that there will be progress in the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula The central bank is expected to keep rates on hold in its second monetary policy meeting this year on Thursday India will probably report on Thursday that economic growth slowed in the fourth quarter. It will also provide an estimate for 2019. The rupee is Asia’s worst-performing currency this year as Prime Minister Narendra Modi plans to spend billions of dollars to buoy the economy ahead of a general election due by May.