Even the fastest pace of economic growth in six years won’t put Russia back on the road to full recovery that President Vladimir Putin promised voters when he was elected last year. The Economy Ministry forecasts that data due to be published Monday will show that growth accelerated to 2% in 2018, the most since 2012. But very little of the impact is filtering through to consumers, who are struggling amid stagnant incomes and rising inflation. A survey conducted by Moscow’s Higher School of Economics found that almost half of Russians think the economic situation in the country is getting worse.  “We can for sure pretend that this growth is good, but, in fact, we need faster growth, especially after several years of recession,” said Anton Tabakh, the chief economist at Moscow-based credit assessor RusRatings. “It’s obvious that the consumer isn’t feeling much benefit.” The disconnect is partly explained by the fact that last year’s economic growth numbers got an artificial boost from one-off factors, such as the start of a big natural gas project in north Siberia, and the trend isn’t expected to continue this year. But consumers are also suffering more than they should due to austerity measures aimed at shielding the economy from the threat of future US sanctions. What Our Economists Say… “Growth of 2% looks uneven no matter how it’s sliced, and a weak finish to 2018 will give way to a sharper downturn this year. But there’s potential for a swift rebound into 2020. Households can hope it’s broader based.”– Scott Johnson, economist, Bloomberg Economics. The central bank raised interest rates late last year after the ruble weakened on concern about new US penalties and excess revenues from oil export taxes have been squirrelled away into reserve funds. Despite running the widest budget surplus in a decade, the government has also raised consumer taxes and the pension age, further hurting the consumer. Even if the economy did grow 2% last year, Russia is still punching well below its weight compared to emerging-market peers and its own performance before recession struck in 2015. Putin promised after his election last year to bring growth to a level that exceeds the global average of 3.7% by the end of his six-year term. Economic growth is expected to slow this year and the central bank warned Friday that first quarter numbers may come in below expectations after investment activity weakened in December. “Even the success of 2% would be debatable for an emerging economy, especially if consumers are not feeling the benefits of this growth,” Inan Demir, an economist and Nomura in London, said by phone. © 2019 Bloomberg L.P