Here’s what caught our attention on Wednesday: 1. Developments in the forex rigging case Standard Chartered has admitted that it manipulated currencies in the US, and is now the subject of fines from the New York state department of financial services. The bank has agreed to pay $40 million to the US authorities, while locally it is facing similar charges. SA’s Competition Commission is pushing for a 10% fine on annual turnover against the banks, which include 22 others, namely Standard Bank and Investec, or for the banks to settle with it, Moneyweb is reporting. Read: CompCom gets upper hand in forex rigging case 2. Eskom’s spiralling debt All parties are coming together to find solutions to save Eskom. It has become the topic of discussion between unions, government, energy users and regulators and at the Mining Indaba currently underway. In the latest, the Energy Intensive User Group, which represents energy users who collectively consume more than 40% of Eskom energy, says that it expects President Cyril Ramaphosa to announce government’s assistance to Eskom to be more than R100 billion, during Thursday’s Sona. The struggling utility is calling for a 15% tariff increase to help curb its looming debt, while government is suggesting a functional unbundling. Energy regulator, Nersa already approved a Regulatory Clearing Account (RCA) methodology for 2019/20 and is further considering an RCA application for an additional R20 billion. Read: Eskom needs more than R100bn, says large energy user body <a href="http://iono.fm/e/651874">Content hosted by iono.fm</a> 3. Bushveld Minerals hopes to list on the JSE London-based mining company, Bushveld Minerals, which has vanadium mines in South Africa, says that it is planning to list on the local bourse by the third quarter of 2019. According to Reuters, the company says the intention of the listing is to allow investment from South Africa, where its core businesses are located. The announcement was made on the sidelines of the Mining Indaba. 4. Sappi Q1 results Paper manufacturing company, Sappi has released its first quarter results for the period ended December 2018, in which it is reporting an increase in earnings before interest, taxation, depreciation and amortisation, excluding special items, to $197 million, an increase of 15%. Earnings per share, excluding special items, increased to 16 US cents and profit for the period amounted to US$81 million, an increase from US$63 million previously reported. Sappi says the resilience of the business alongside its diversified product portfolio, enabled it to reach its profitability guidance. 5. Rand update January was said to be a topper as far as the rand is concerned, and February may just be following suit as the greenback is impacted by volatility and uncertainty. A Reuters poll, however, indicates that the rand may reverse gains due to fiscal constraints and weak growth. On Wednesday, the rand was at R13.42 at 8:40. Read more here.