Alexkor published its 2018 integrated annual report some three months after the due date. This belies the state diamond miner’s commitment to “continuous improvement in risk management and good corporate governance”. It is clear that the top management structure of Alexkor is being revamped. Tshediso Matona was appointed interim chair in September 2018, Lemogang Pitsoe was appointed CEO in December 2017, and Adila Chowan was appointed chief financial Officer in January 2018. This should result in an improvement in getting the March 2019 report out in time. Financial results In a nutshell, profit for the year is R34.2 million (2017: R6 million), reducing the accumulated loss to R44.4 million (2017: R78.7 million). However, it should be noted that without the investment income of R51.3 million (2017: R35.2 million), the group would have made a loss for the year of R17.1 million (2017: R29.1 million). Irregular expenditure amounted to R26 million (2017: R14 million). Exploration and evaluation expenditure to the tune of R27.5 million was capitalised. No details were provided as to where the exploration was carried out, and whether any of the exploration was in regard to new possibilities, such as coal. Alexkor made a bad business decision to grant an exclusive deep water mining licence to one company. That company’s vessel caught fire, resulting in zero carat production for the year.  This loss does not appear to have been covered by insurance. Hence, total carat production decreased from 162 172 carats of gemstone quality diamonds in 2017 to 41 941 carats in 2018. To add to the woes, the carat production coming out of the mid-water concessions was negatively impacted by poor weather conditions. Expansion into coal and other ventures? Alexkor is still intent on attaining long-term sustainability by diversifying. The board has been evaluating various projects, including acquiring an equity stake in a coal beneficiation plant, thermal coal, collaboration with emerging miners to supply coal to the beneficiation plant, and building a relationship with other state-owned enterprises like “Eskom, Transnet and mining companies”. The board states that it will continue on its path to identify other business ventures and engage with National Treasury to obtain funding. Large distances from the Richtersveld did not seem to concern the board, and due diligence on a coal wash plant situated in the Witbank-Middelburg area was completed. The board also considered using the facilities of the Kimberley International Diamond and Jewellery Academy for beneficiation and training. It would perhaps be more cost effective to simply provide bursaries. These activities, and the expenditure incurred in pursuing them, should now come to an end as the minister of public enterprises has placed a moratorium on all acquisitions and disposals. External audit report External auditor SizweNtsalubaGobodo issued an unqualified audit report but found non-compliance in the following instances: 1. Goods, works or services were not always procured through a procurement process that is fair, equitable, transparent and competitive as is required by the PFMA [Public Finance Management Act]. 2. The awarding of certain contracts was not always done in line with the requirements of the Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Act and Regulations. 3. The accounting authority (the board) did not correctly investigate irregular, fruitless and wasteful expenditure identified in the prior year. 4. Disciplinary steps were not taken against officials who had incurred irregular, fruitless and wasteful expenditure. 5. Proper and complete records were not maintained as evidence to support the investigations into irregular and fruitless and wasteful expenditure and allegations of financial misconduct committed by members of the accounting authority. 6. The accounting authority fell short on: effective leadership based on good governance; effective oversight in preventing, identifying and reporting irregular expenditure; performance reporting; and compliance with related internal controls. Richtersveld community The Alexkor alluvial diamond mining operation takes place along a narrow strip of 120 kilometers of diamondiferous land along the western coast of the Richtersveld, from the Gariep (Orange) River in the north to just below Port Nolloth in the south. In a landmark decision in 2003, the Supreme Court of Appeal (SCA) restored the Richtersveld Community’s customary law interest (akin to common law ownership) in this land, including the right to the mineral resources of the land. The SCA also ruled that Alexkor must compensate the Richtersveld community for damage done to the land, or repair the damage. That same year, the Constitutional Court upheld the SCA decision with an important amendment – that the Richtersveld community held ownership of the said land under indigenous law (not customary), including the rights to minerals and precious stones, and to the exclusive beneficial use and occupation thereof. Alexkor, however, was firmly entrenched. Many years later, in 2011, a pooling and sharing joint venture (PSJV) arrangement was established with the Richtersveld community, with Alexkor taking a 51% share. This covers all land mining operations in Alexander Bay. The government has provided funds, and restoration and repair of environmental damage has commenced. The joint venture is not faring well. In 2018 revenue for the year dropped 46% to R409.1 million (2017: R757.5 million). No reasons were given for this drop in revenue. The PSJV generated an operating loss of R14.2 million (2017: R29.6 million profit). Outstanding matters Alexkor should disclose the total amount it has expended on coal exploration and the evaluation of coal projects. A final determination should be made as to whether it is commercially feasible for a diamond mining company situated in the Richtersveld to continue to pursue an expansion into coal in the Witbank-Middelburg area. The deed of settlement with the Richtersveld community was signed on April 22, 2007, yet it hasn’t been fully implemented. SRK Consulting was only appointed in 2017/18 to evaluate the financial liability of the legacy rehabilitation. No date has been determined for the finalisation of the legacy rehabilitation, and the environmental rehabilitation fund is underfunded by R107.8 million (2017: R131.3 million). New minister of public enterprises Pravin Gordhan is making his presence felt. He has launched an investigation into alleged irregularities in regard to granting the diamond marketing tender to a supplier, and has implemented lifestyle audits. However, a more important consideration: should the quest to seek long-term sustainability of a loss-making company trump the sustainability of an indigenous community? Alexkor should investigate how it can rehabilitate  said land to sustain farming, and restore the seabed so that it can again sustain fishing. And small-scale mining is most probably more efficient and profitable than a top heavy inefficient company with a head office in Sandton. The “exclusive beneficial use and occupation thereof” means exactly that. When will the Richtersveld community have that? Questions I would have liked to raise with Alexkor, but it was impossible to get hold of them: 1. Alexkor capitalised exploration and evaluation expenditure of R27.5 million. Could you please provide me with details such as where the exploration is taking place? E.g. all in the Richtersveld area? Does it include any exploration/evaluation in coal? 2. Was the loss in carat production due to a fire on a vessel not covered by insurance? 3. Revenue on the joint operation was 46% down. Is there an explanation for this? Is this due to ongoing problems between Alexkor and the Richterveld community? 4. Have any studies been carried out on the life left in the mine? 5. The environmental rehabilitation is underfunded by R107.9 million – how are you addressing this? 6. Could you please explain the ‘Interest allocated for operational use’ of R16.4 million? It does not appear that this was spent on the PSJV recapitalisation?