Whenever one writes on South Africa’s massive problems such as unemployment or the relative decline in per capita income compared to other countries, many readers are quick to blame population growth. The reality is that South Africa is not experiencing a population explosion. Our population is growing at 1.2%, which is slightly higher than the 1% world average, but not due to females having babies to receive social grants. The graph below shows the population growth since 1910, and highlights the growth in the black population.  I bet you nobody showed you the actual graph of the change in the number of births and deaths for that matter. Well, here it is …  As you can see, there are fewer births for the majority of the last six years. The trend peaked in 2006, and since then the decline in the number of births is astounding! In many public hospitals today there are more foreign births than South African births (something for another day). While there are individual cases of young women having children to access child grants, population data shows that the fastest growing part of our population is those over 65 years of age. Yes, we are getting older – and as we do, we blame the young falsely. We are certainly not ageing wisely here. Over the last five years, the compounded annual population growth rate was 1.6% – slightly up from the 17-year average of 1.5% as the HIV/Aids medicine programme only really got going after 2012 (although free antiretrovirals were introduced in April 2004). The table below also shows that the children and young-adult groups have the lowest growth rate at present. While the number of births in SA is declining, the slight increase in children is probably due to net immigration and better child survival rates as well as higher births a decade or so ago (see graph further down). Moreover, those in high school and post-school education (aged between 15 and 24) are actually in decline. (This is still due to the Aids epidemic that peaked a decade or so ago).  The working age population still reflects a lower base partly due to Aids and some migration into South Africa. Growth of the main working age population is at 2.4% a year, which would be regarded as quite rapid growth especially as Aids had a severe impact on this grouping, and this makes a comparison a bit more complicated. Net migration is estimated to be about three million people, mostly in the 25 to 54 age group, over the last 20 odd years. Since at least two million to 2.5 million migrants would be in this age group, this added about 10% to the main working age population. The main working age population (age 25 to 54) was estimated to be about 24 million, indicating that about 20% of the growth in this age group is from net migration gains. Net migration is the immigration numbers minus the emigration numbers. Stats SA’s net migration estimates are probably a little lower than mine, but for the sake of completeness, its seems that at least one million South Africans have left South Africa while four million foreigners have come to live here – making for a net migration figure of three  million. (The one million emigration figure comes partly from OECD data on SA-born and other-country data. It could be as high as 1.4 million, but I believe that a number of just over 1.1 million to 1.3 million is the most likely.) Older adults will have some migration impact but it is likely to be less in percentage terms, and here the growth rate is 2.6% – fully 1% higher than the population growth for the country as a whole over the last five years. Pensioners are the fastest growing part of our population More interesting however is that the group of those over 65 – who are very likely to be on pension or old age grants – is growing twice as fast as the overall population. Medical advances and chronic medicines are increasing the lifespan of people. The fastest growing sub-sector in South Africa was Asian males over 80 – a 7% increase per annum over the last five years. White males over 80 are the third fastest growing sub-sector of the population, and increased by 4.6% every year over the previous five years or so. I think birth control is 80 years too late in both cases for those actively seeking to reduce population growth. And I’m not sure killing everyone over the age of 55 would be supported by any politician as they all seem to fall in that age category. In the last two years or so the population growth rate has also declined from 1.7% to 1.6%. Forecasts are that population growth will slow to 1.4% by 2023. So if one looks at the population tree, it is growing taller faster than sideways! That is not what many people believe to be the case. Today 50 is the new 30, and all around the world retirement is being delayed. I think in 10 years the debate will be about why don’t we retire South Africans only at age 75! Retirement savings will be more important than nappies. Fact! Currently, the growth in our population is driven more by the number of deaths, which is in decline, than the growth in actual births. Child deaths, adult deaths and even deaths before say age 65 have declined rapidly. Aids deaths per year have more than halved, and the SA population is ageing faster than births are driving the population explosion. Over a more extended period, SA will need to spend less on schools than on nursing homes. Older folk require more medicine, carers, and they also need smaller houses. Mike Schüssler is an economist at economists.co.za.