Financial media and email inboxes are inundated with invitations to invest in Section 12J assets. Given the tax breaks afforded by the investment (similar to an RA, but not quite), the messages have increased in frequency and intensity prior to tax year-end. I’m not writing about the merits or otherwise of Section 12J assets. These are an alternative investment class and fall within the private equity and venture capital sector. However, we need to consider the merits of investing in private equity for the retail investor. How risky is this asset class, is it accessible to the unconnected private investor and, most importantly, is it wealth-creating? Negative perceptions about private equity range from incestuous deals made in smoke-filled back rooms to capitalist overlords vacuuming up outsized returns at the expense of ordinary tax-paying citizens, employees of private-equity-owned companies, and bondholders. There are examples that feed such perceptions, such as Edcon, Theranos or Energy Future Holdings. The losses were in the billions of dollars. In the case of the Edcon and Energy Future Holdings, the last public shareholders, before the firms went private, were the last people to make money from these companies. There is a macro trend that is important to acknowledge. The graph below shows the decline in the number of listed companies in the OECD countries and the increase in private equity deals via exits and buyouts. The decline in the number of listed companies does have the effect of shrinking the investment universe of publicly traded equities. Private equity deal volumes are cyclical and tend to move in step with the interest rate cycle. However, the increasing trend of private equity investments cannot be ignored, and investors may need to educate themselves and pursue investment opportunities in this sector.  Private equity is a very popular asset class for ultra-wealthy families. According to the UBS Global Family Office report, as much as 21.6% of wealth is invested in direct private equity investments or private equity funds of funds. Contrast this with Regulation 28, which only allows allocation of 10% in private equity investments. Arguably most South African fund managers do not have more than a 2% to 3% allocation to private equity. The reasons are probably to do with the relative smaller size of the private equity sector in South Africa but also because the risk of private equity investments is higher and different from normal equities. Risk factors There are three considerations when thinking about the risk of private equity investments. Private equity does not have the same information efficiency as shares that are publicly traded. In other words, price discovery of firms that are held by private equity funds is based on valuations conducted by the fund managers and firms themselves. In contrast, price discovery on public markets happens frequently during each trade. Another consideration is the relative illiquidity of private equity investments. The investments cannot be bought and sold as easily as buying or selling shares of companies listed on stock exchanges. Most experts will tell you that the duration for private equity investments is about 10 years. Finally, most private equity investments are highly leveraged. If things go wrong, permanent capital loss will be experienced. Returns The returns from private equity investments can be higher than publicly traded equities, so investors can be rewarded for allocating money to private equity. The graph below from the California Public Employees’ Retirement System (Calpers), a major private equity investor, shows the higher returns from private equity. The 10- and 20-year outperformance is noteworthy – demonstrating a 66% outperformance on overall portfolio returns. Source: Calpers Calpers is a $350 billion fund. The question is whether you or I can enjoy such returns through our private equity investments. The graphs below are based on three private equity portfolios compared to each other and the Vanguard 500 Index Fund. Portfolio 1 is the Alps/Red Rocks Listed Private Equity Fund, Portfolio 2 is the Invesco Global Listed Private Equity ETF, and Portfolio 3 is an equal weighted composite of Blackstone (BX), Carlyle group (CG), Apollo (APO), KKR & Co (KKR) and Brookfield (BAM). Portfolio 3 outperformed all the other portfolios but also had the most severe drawdowns (loss from peak to trough).  Source: Silicon Cloud Technologies Source: Silicon Cloud Technologies  The companies that constitute Portfolio 3 are the giants of private equity. As an investor in them, you enjoy both the fees from structuring transactions as well as returns (carried interest) from the underlying investments. The managers who run them are also high-risk takers and their portfolios may not necessarily be diversified. Given the information asymmetry in private equity, I wonder if private equity ETFs are at a disadvantage. Private equity does have a place in high value portfolios and the best investments are offshore. Section 12J investments are interesting but they do not yet have a track record that will merit closer attention. Pragnesh Desai is CEO of Galileo Asset Managers. Read: Investment Unusual: Section 12J