The South African Reserve Bank (Sarb) has no immediate plans to change its inflation target range of 3-6% to a single target of 4.5%. Speaking at a seminar hosted by S&P Dow Jones Indices on Tuesday, Sarb deputy governor Daniel Mminele said the bank does not set its own mandate, but there are discussions with government about the appropriateness of the target range from time to time. “At this stage, there are no plans to sort of consider a change in that range.” The Sarb has utilised an inflation target range of 3-6% for some time, but there has been a subtle shift under governor Lesetja Kganyago’s leadership to emphasise the midpoint of the range. Mminele said that after central banks adopt an inflation targeting range, it tends to narrow. Ultimately, it converts to a point target with deviations on either side. “So these are the kind of steps that typically get followed as and when the regime matures.” Mminele said that in his view, the current target specification is fine. Kganyago has indicated that the bank wants to see inflation readings closer to the midpoint of the range, and it has had some success. Consumer price inflation slowed to 4.5% in December. The Sarb has found itself at the centre of policy debates in the run up to the May 8 election. Although its private shareholders, mandate and independence are different topics on paper, practically, they are somewhat intertwined, and seemingly diverse views within the ruling party on how the bank should operate have left investors with more questions than answers. Mixed signals While the ANC’s national elective conference decided in 2017 that the Sarb should be nationalised, the ruling party’s 2019 election manifesto did not expressly revisit the issue. Instead it indicated that the Sarb must “pursue a flexible monetary policy regime”. “Without sacrificing price stability, monetary policy must take into account other objectives such as employment creation and economic growth,” it said. President Cyril Ramaphosa has been quick to allay fears that the ruling party is seeking a change in the bank’s mandate or hoping to tamper with its independence, but it is not clear why it included such a paragraph in its election manifesto if it is satisfied with the status quo. Without explicitly referring to the ANC’s election manifesto, Mminele said it had “at times” been suggested that the Sarb should place greater emphasis on growth and employment objectives and that its mandate should be changed to make these objectives clearer. “These suggestions may miss the key channels through which monetary policy best serves the goal of long-term economic development,” Mminele said. He said South Africa’s monetary policy framework is not one of rigid inflation targeting, but a flexible one, which takes full account of the outlook for real economic growth and how it is likely to affect inflation. “Trying to kick-start economic growth and employment through a larger dose of monetary policy stimulus would probably only have a short-lived impact on activity,” he said. “By contrast, its implications for the current account, for policy uncertainty and inflation expectations would most likely be negative. Over time, therefore, the consequence would probably be higher, rather than lower interest rates.” The Sarb kept the repo rate unchanged at 6.75% in January after hiking it by 25 basis points in November. Monetary policy cannot contribute directly to stronger economic growth and employment creation in the long run, but by ensuring a stable financial environment, monetary policy fulfils an important precondition for achieving the necessary growth and development, he added. Sarb gets ‘good grades’ from S&P Konrad Reuss, managing director and regional head for Africa at S&P Global Ratings, says the ratings agency gave the Sarb “good grades” for its independence and track record of keeping inflation in check. With regards to ownership, Reuss says there are many different examples around the world of how the ownership of central banks is set out. “What is important for us from a ratings agency perspective is independence. An independent central bank has a strong, long-lasting record of keeping inflation low and monetary stability.” Mohammed Nalla, head of economic research at the Public Investment Corporation, says that from a policy perspective, a lot more coherence is required. “Do we believe in this independent central bank? Do we believe in inflation targeting? And once we land on some sort of commonality there, let’s set that in stone. Let’s provide that policy certainty for a period of time. I’m not saying let’s be dogmatic about it, [but] let’s say we assess that this is the right policy stance for the next 10 years.”