Here’s what caught our attention on Friday: 1. Eskom’s Jabu Mabuza appears before state capture inquiry Attention at the state capture inquiry has shifted to past and present developments at Eskom. On Friday, the state utility’s soon to resign board chairman, Jabu Mabuza will be taking to the stand, where he is expected to produce evidence relating to Eskom’s mismanagement and supposed corruption dealings. The inquiry into Eskom is being spread over three weeks after it kicked off on Wednesday. 2. Northam Platinum results Northam Platinum, which has two primary operating assets, Zondereinde and Booysendal mines, is reporting a 192.6% increase in normalised headline earnings to R553.3 million, equating to normalised earnings per share of 108.5 cents, for the six months ended December 31 2018. The company’s sales revenue increased by 48.6% to R5.0 billion from R3.4 billion the previous period. Northam Platinum is attributing its growth to a 40.5% increase in the volumes of 4E oz sold and a 4.2% increase in the basket price to USD1 013 per 4E oz and a weaker rand to dollar exchange rate. The company has resolved to not declare a dividend for the period. 3. Daniel Mminele favoured as next Absa CEO Absa is still on the search for a CEO, with Maria Ramos’ departure. The company is said to favour South African Reserve Bank’s deputy governor, Daniel Mminele as its next CEO. This is according to reports by Bloomberg who says Mminele is one of a select number of candidates for the position, and if appointed will be the first black CEO of the bank. Mminele’s current term at Sarb expires in June, and he will be subject to six months of so-called gardening leave. 4. EOH to opt for possible restructuring IT company, EOH which has been in the headlines this week after its former founder, Asher Bohot and a number of other executives announced their resignations, is now opting for possible restructuring. Its CEO Stephen van Coller plans to break the company into different parts in order to obtain greater value from its portfolio of 270 companies. According to Bloomberg, EOH plans to separate the public-sector services business from a private-sector arm and focus it on shorter-term contracts. 5. Rand update The rand has been on a bout of swinging between losses and gains this week, following finance minister, Tito Mbwoeni’s budget speech. It weakened on Wednesday and quickly reversed losses after the minister announced that the government would not be taking Eskom’s debt into its hands. For now, traders are just taking the developments into its stride, Bloomberg reported. On Friday, the rand was at R13.98 to the dollar at 10:09.