There have been calls to lower South Africa’s corporate income tax rate to improve the country’s relative competitiveness and to ignite economic growth. Corporate income tax is the third largest source of tax revenue for government after personal income tax and Vat. It contributes 18% of overall tax revenue. Compared to the US, where the federal corporate income tax rate was reduced from 35% to 21% in 2018, and the UK, where it also fell significantly over the last decade, South Africa’s 28% seems high. At face value, some of its African counterparts, including Botswana and Mauritius, also appear relatively more attractive on this measure. With government under pressure to ignite economic growth – currently expected to be a paltry 1.3% in 2019 – a reduction in the corporate income tax rate seems like a good idea. At least on paper. But with an election around the corner, and warnings from Cosatu that the 2018 Vat increase has had a “devastating effect” on poor households and low-income earners, lowering the corporate tax rate is unlikely to happen. “They [president Cyril Ramaphosa and finance minister Tito Mboweni] need to reverse the Vat hike and announce the wealth tax and also increase the corporate tax back to the 2012 levels of 34%,” Cosatu said in a statement on Tuesday. Other factors While there may be room to lower the tax rate in the long term in line with recommendations by the Davis Tax Committee, government currently needs every drop of tax revenue to balance its books. There is also a realisation that other issues – including policy uncertainty and electricity pricing – are a bigger deterrent to investment than taxes. Ramaphosa hopes to lure $100 billion of foreign investment to South Africa to ignite economic growth and reduce unemployment. Mike Teuchert, national head of taxation at Mazars, says while a reduced corporate tax rate may be beneficial to the economy and result in higher tax revenues, it would be a big gamble to lower tax rates in the hope that this would happen. Other factors also have an impact on foreign investment. “It is counter-intuitive but there are some studies that have shown that it [lowering the corporate tax rate] could well have a positive effect [on tax revenue].” On whether a relatively high corporate tax rate would deter potential investors, Delia Ndlovu, tax and legal managing director at Deloitte Africa, says it is a factor, but investors will consider the picture holistically – including the political, economic and technological conditions in the country. Ultimately, investors place a higher premium on the commercial opportunity than the tax rate, she adds. Billy Joubert, director for transfer pricing at Deloitte Africa, says the government is very aware of the potential disincentive of a high corporate tax rate, which is why it was cut from 29% to 28% a few years ago. High rate not necessarily a deterrant A relatively high corporate tax rate doesn’t necessarily mean companies won’t invest, but will encourage multinationals to plan their tax affairs to minimise the tax they pay in South Africa. Where countries have a higher tax rate, there is a bigger need for rules aimed at restricting the illegitimate shifting of profits to jurisdictions with more favourable corporate tax rates. South Africa’s corporate income tax rate may seem high compared to some of its African neighbours, but the withholding taxes imposed by many other African companies on management fees and service fees are often a much bigger problem than the corporate tax rate, Joubert says. “When you start comparing South African [corporate] tax rates with African tax rates, you need to have the whole picture,” Joubert says. “The tax picture is much wider than just the corporate tax rate.”