South Africa‘s rand rebounded on Thursday as traders bet that a budget released a day before would persuade Moody’s not to downgrade the country’s debt to “junk” status next month. President Cyril Ramaphosa, who faces divisions within his ruling African National Congress before parliamentary elections in May, has staked his reputation on reviving South Africa‘s economy. Finance minister Tito Mboweni on Wednesday painted a bleaker outlook for growth and debt in a budget that gave a R69 billion ($5 billion) bailout over three years to Eskom, the struggling state power utility. The rand initially weakened, falling to a seven-week low of 14.3700 to the dollar. It recovered after markets digested Mboweni’s pledge of modest cuts to public spending and more widespread reforms to state companies, including Eskom. By 0839 GMT on Thursday, it was trading at 13.8975 per dollar, 0.8% stronger than its overnight close. Government bond also gained, with the yield on the benchmark government debt due in 2026 dipping 4.5 basis points to 8.79%. Moody’s, the last of the major credit agencies not to rate South Africa as “junk”, said the budget showed South Africa‘s limited options in a challenging economy, reflecting sympathy for a situation Mboweni inherited when he took over the Treasury in October. Moody’s will review its rating next month. “The Finance Minister explained that the (Eskom) financial aid was subject to conditions and outlined the first steps towards restructuring the electricity utility,” Commerzbank analysts said in a note. “This seems to have alleviated … concerns about a rating downgrade at the end of March.” Ramaphosa has pledged to split Eskom into three units to deal with inefficiencies, a move cautiously welcomed by investors. The utility cut off power across swathes of South Africa last week because of problems with its plants, diesel shortages and planned maintenance. Mboweni backed up Ramaphosa in his budget statement, saying without structural change, putting public money into Eskom was like “pouring water into a sieve”. “The minister’s firm approach to Eskom’s debt and his mention of finding a strategic private partner for the transmission component once the utility has been broken into three elements can be viewed as positive from an economic point of view,” said Maarten Ackerman, chief economist at Citadel.