We may be reeling from testimonies and revelations being made at the Zondo commission of inquiry into state capture, but let us not for a moment plead naiveté. There have been many moments when the venality of politicians has been laid bare. History takes us as far back as the Roman Empire right up to the present-day big business of American politics. Two serious issues stand out for me. First, our tendency to be hard on the misdeeds of politicians and lukewarm about the irresponsible, corrupt, perversely motivated conduct of directors and CEOs of South African companies – often justifying the outrage against the former because they are entrusted with taxpayers’ money. This is not to say that politicians are blameless victims: they willingly allow themselves to be bought, owned and used by the commanding in Corporate SA. Democratic economics tells us that an emerging country is equally affected by the misdeeds of private financial flows as it by kleptomaniac politicians. Multinational companies’ dealings in particular, whether legal or illicit, have significant effects on politics in a country. The influence of business on politics existed long before the advent of democracy in South Africa. There is nothing original about the seven days of testimony by former Bosasa COO Angelo Agrizzi. It has, however, unadorned the extent to which the private sector (someone else besides Guptas) has a grimy and Machiavellian hand in politics. Again, it does not mean we shouldn’t demand accountability from our leaders. Read: Agrizzi continues to implicate political heavyweights This commission has brought the storm to our doors. Skimming over the corrupting disposition of business cannot be disregarded anymore. Not when we have been privy to how the power wielded by big companies can cause momentous troubles for our democracy. Second – and the real issue for me – is the implications this has on the ANC. It would appear that in addition to its many selves, the ANC has added that of ironist. Exactly who hates ‘white monopoly capital’? Many of its top leaders have publicly labelled ‘white monopoly capital’ (WMC) as the enemy of the people and an obstacle to transformation. The party theme on radical economic transformation and black ownership sees black industrialists fêted and hailed as a heroic alternative to white businesses dominated by the ‘pale males’ of South Africa. The great irony is that the party and its leaders are and always have been bound to the very white monopoly capital they so vehemently claim to spurn and resist. Therefore declarations by the ANC that it is its representatives who are accused – and not the party itself – reveals a distinct lack of discernment or ignorance, or perhaps spin-doctoring. The ruling party has grave responsibilities to South Africa. For its senior leaders who are in government to be implicated in such matters warrants scrutiny. After all, it was in his capacity as the president of the country and not the ANC that Bosasa sought out Cyril Ramaphosa. The commission of inquiry is as much about the future of South Africa as it about an ailing party that has trapped itself in a norm of corruption that goes beyond the implicated individuals. For it is these very corrupt practices that take root in functions of the state and public service, eventually spilling over into daily societal practices. The details Agrizzi shared about Bosasa CEO Gavin Watson’s alleged ‘control and access’ to then president Jacob Zuma and the resulting influence on leading institutions of state gives an indication of how profoundly entangled business and politics are. More than that, his testimony exemplifies the string-pulling effects a private company can have on political leaders. From this, subsequent corrupt practices – from clientelism and the breaking of rules and regulations to extortion, bribery and nepotism – are enabled. Furthermore, Agrizzi’s testimony reveals how informal practices involving the arrangement of exchanges of money creates a rapacious political elites who are ultimately responsible for the decline of the state. Readers who are familiar with my column will know that I am as repulsed by private sector corruption and wrongdoing as I am by those of politicians and government. This is a future many died for Those in business or government who intentionally seek to derail the better future many died for and many others are trying to build must face the full wrath of society and the justice system. Since it began, the commission of inquiry into state capture has exposed the degree to which private sector money has and continues to orchestrate the corruption of South African politics in order to benefit itself. It is these sordid affairs between money and government leaders that we must guard against with all our might. They are hamstringing the economy and making it so difficult for hard-working citizens to pull themselves towards a better future. This is more than just a matter of politics, of deal-making, of profits, of loyalty to this or that party and race. This is about calling out the private sector’s reprehensible role in aiding and abetting the regression government. We must denounce it with the same passion, vigour and noise that we denounce leaders who use their political power to self-enrich, break laws, avoid jail and thwart the progress of ordinary citizens. The companies implicated in this mess, including Bosasa, expose the destructive role of those in business who use political power not just for business gain, but also to frustrate the efforts of those who enforce the rules of society – an atrocity against South Africans, and a swipe against the country’s progress. Politics and politicians have become an instrument used by business in a sullied way to ‘succeed’, concurrently undermining democracy. What has unmistakably come to light is: (a) The manipulation by capitalism of the state system within which it operates, and (b) Far from being a party that seeks to undo inequality, fight corruption and transform the private sector, as the ANC claims, its senior leaders are prime representatives, purveyors and unashamed partakers in the very WMC entrenchment they so claim to loathe. Ironic, isn’t it? Read: SA’s war on graft is picking up speed. But will anyone go to jail?