Here’s what caught our attention on Friday: 1. Load shedding cancelled on Friday, for now South Africans can breathe a sigh of relief this Friday as Eskom has called off load shedding for the day. This is, however, subject to demand in the day. The utility says it has repaired some power plants and replenished diesel and water supplies in other operations. However, it has warned that any further unexpected breakdowns could result in continued load shedding. Hold on to your candles, just in case. Read: Eskom to end power cuts after a week of disruption and more here and here 2. Gold Fields results Gold mining company Gold Fields marks losses for the year ended December 31 2018, as headline earnings fell to US $61 million in 2018 from US $210 million in 2017, net loss for the year amounted to US $ 348 million or US $ 0.42 cents per share. The company’s normalised profit from continued operations fell to US $27 million from US $154 million in 2017. In accordance with its dividend policy, Gold Fields is declaring a dividend of 40 SA cents per share for the year. The company has also announced the completion of its South Deep mine’s restructuring. 3. Sibanye plans almost 6 000 job cuts Sibanye-Stillwater has said that it plans to enter into a restructuring process in which almost 6 000 jobs could potentially be at risk. The miner has experienced financial losses at two of its gold operations; the Beatrix 1 and the Driefontein 2,6,7,8 shafts during 2018. Sibanye says that alongside its larger mining areas, above inflation cost increases, including labour and electricity, contributed to its falling margins. The company will be in discussion with its stakeholders on the restructuring process. Read more here. 4. Vumatel to install CCTV cameras across Joburg Vumatel subsidiary, Vumacam is building a citywide CCTV network to offer high-definition video feeds to security companies and law-enforcement. TechCentral is reporting that Vumacam plans to spend R500 million to roll out 15 000 cameras across the city, with the full deployment expected to reach completion in about 12 months. The company says the network will use its own fibre in Vumatel’s ducts as well as the fibre networks of other providers. Cape Town might be next on the list. 5. Rand update The local currency has been hit by volatility over the past week, as the US dollar gained strength. Eskom woes in the domestic environment has compounded pressure on the rand. Market participants will be keeping a close eye in the lead up to the budget speech, which will be delivered by finance minister Tito Mboweni on Wednesday. On Thursday, the rand dipped to the R14 mark. On Friday morning, the currency was at R14.16 to the dollar at 9:10. Read: Rand volatility tops global peers as SA risks mount <a href="http://iono.fm/e/655408">Content hosted by iono.fm</a>