In 2007, Warren Buffett, one of the richest and most renowned investors in the world, bet a million dollars that an index fund would outperform a collection of hedge funds over 10 years. Over the period of the bet, the S&P 500 index fund returned 7.1% compounded annually, significantly more than the basket of funds selected by an asset manager at Protégé Partners, who took Buffett up on the wager. That hedge basket only returned an average of 2.2%. The global hedge fund universe is very broad and Buffett by his own admission stated that some managers would outperform a passive index over time. Passive providers are quick to extrapolate this bet to mean that passive is the only way to achieve your financial goals. However, Protégé would have been better placed focusing its attention on the tip of the African continent. Had Buffett made that wager against a basket of South African hedge fund managers the outcome would likely have been very different. Not only does a composite index of South African hedge funds as published by HedgeNews Africa outperform passive equity index funds in South Africa, but there are a number of South African hedge funds that run offshore US dollar denominated funds that have outperformed the S&P 500 and Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway shares. A basket of some of the largest and longest running hedge funds in South Africa has delivered US dollar returns over and above that of the S&P 500, global equities represented by the MSCI All Country World Index and Berkshire Hathaway Class A . The table below reflects actual performance numbers for these funds over the period in US dollars and after all fees including foreign exchange hedging costs. As you can see, a simple equal allocation to these funds generated close to 10% of annualised return at a third of the volatility and significantly lower drawdowns. January 1 2008 to December 31 2017 Source: Author South Africa is the only country in the world to formally regulate hedge funds to this extent, with the introduction of board notice 52 of 2015. That means they fall under the Collective Investment Schemes Act, just like well-known South African unit trusts, and are regulated in the same way. In summary, this differentiates the South African hedge fund industry which can boast the following: * Direct and fund-of-fund hedge managers with more than 10 years of audited track records. * Majority of managers have outperformed benchmark equity indexes. * Hedge funds are now formally regulated. * South Africa is an emerging market and therefore enjoys all the alpha opportunities that accompany these markets due to foreign flows and mispricing, which has been lacking for global developed-market peers the last decade. If an investor needs more convincing about this asset class, the broader HedgeNews Africa composite index and the Alpha Asset Management fund-of-fund portfolio Alpha Prime Equity Hedge (APEH) ended 2018 positive while the South African equity market and global equities were down significantly. January 2019 has also gotten off to a good start with APEH up almost as much as the market, providing recent support for the downside protection offered without sacrificing upside. This is because active management has taken advantage of opportunities from last year’s sell off, just as it has done time and time again over the last decade. This is not a continuation of the tired active-versus-passive debate, but highlights the quality of the hedge fund manager in South Africa and why a combination of hedge in your portfolio alongside passive products can add tremendous value given the superior returns and low correlation to equities. The goal of diversification is to achieve your performance objectives and take the smoothest route to get there. Clearly hedge funds will assist. Behavioural finance tells us that human bias causes us to buy high and sell low. Plenty, if not the majority of investors sold when the S&P 500 was down almost 50% in 2008 or along the way, highlighting the problem with the theory that you only need passive to achieve your goals. Human beings have a very hard time controlling their emotions, especially when it involves money, and by reducing downside with the inclusion of hedge you can control the emotional roller coaster without sacrificing returns. The Buffett bet had a happy ending, Both Buffett and Protégé originally put around $320 000 into bonds as security for the bet, which was expected to appreciate to $1 million over 10 years. The bonds appreciated faster than either party expected. In 2012, the duo decided to purchase Berkshire shares, which valued at $2.22 million. Buffett said he would hand over any proceeds from the victory to charity. The charity he chose was his local Girls Inc, which provides after-school care as well as summer programmes for girls aged five to 18. John Haslett is a portfolio manager at Alpha Asset Management.