Disputes among those living in close proximity happen. Whether your neighbour is an office building, workshop, nightclub, block of flats or a home, sources of conflict can easily arise – noise, odours, obstructions, abuse of your property or neglect of theirs – and emotions can run high. How you choose to handle the conflict can make all the difference to the outcome as well as your relationships with your neighbours. Your bottom line too. Litigation takes time and costs money. An alarming number of both legal and domestic conflicts are launched by warring neighbours in circumstances where the appointment of a trained mediator could have resolved the differences in a myriad of ways. Win-win versus win or lose The effect of the win/lose nature of litigation is that while one party may be restrained from certain behaviour or forced to take certain remedial action, it will do little to foster good neighbourly relations. The purpose of a mediation is not to continue the animosity between the parties but to rather find a common ground, temper emotions, ease the tension. It also has the added benefit of creating an environment where further disputes are unlikely to occur, where dialogue can take that place. Nothing is more energy-sapping than coming home to what you believe is your sanctuary only to engage in a battle with a neighbour. It is obviously not human nature to always agree, and in circumstances where parties are unable to resolve the differences between them, enlisting the help of a mediator who will outline all your options would be a wise route to take. You as the neighbour or complainant need to consider what the appropriate strategy is – is it legal action or mediation? In the case of mediation: One of the big things about mediation is that it doesn’t just focus on what the law says – it deals with keeping things equitable too – deciding on what is best at the time, based on merit and circumstances. There appears to be a move among lawyers to embrace mediation and its advantages but there are still a few that will push to go to court. People can’t be forced into mediation but the courts do encourage mediation before pursuing litigation. Few people appreciate that mediation is an answer – a process that will not only salvage good neighbourly relations, but will save a lot of time and money … and the possibility of assault charges/jail time for throwing that punch/coffee cup in the heat of the moment! PJ Veldhuizen is managing director of the Cape Town law firm Gillan & Veldhuizen.