Investors should usually only judge the performance of equity funds over long time frames. This is because it can take years for the stock market to move through different cycles, and you should want to measure how a fund performs in different market conditions. Sometimes, however, a market can experience distinctly different environments in a short space of time. It can be interesting to observe how funds perform in these different periods, even though they are relatively short. Sharp decline, steady recovery This has been the experience on the JSE over the past 10 months. For the three months from the start of September to the end of November last year, the market experienced a sharp decline. The FTSE/JSE All Share Index (Alsi) fell 12.6%. In the seven months since then, however, the market has made a steady recovery. From the start of December 2018 to the end of June 2019, the Alsi was up 17%, taking it back to more or less where it was 10 months earlier. Over the full 10-month period, the Alsi was up 2.3%. Insights and lessons Studying performance data from Morningstar over these two periods reveals some fascinating insights. They contain some important lessons for investors. The first thing worth noting is that if you divide the funds into quintiles by their performance (in other words, the top 20%, next 20% and so on), the overlap from one period to the next is minimal. As the table below shows, there is very little correlation between how a fund performed in the down cycle and how it performed in the subsequent recovery. Source: Morningstar The most consistent funds were those that were average or below average. The least consistent were those that performed the worst in the downturn. They were most likely to perform better in the recovery. Extending this analysis reveals just how notable this is. The table below shows how funds in each quintile in the initial period went on to perform in the subsequent period. Source: Morningstar What this reveals is pretty stark. More than half of the funds that were in the top two quintiles during the downturn were in the bottom two quintiles in the recovery period. Conversely, the funds most likely to be in the top quintile during the seven-month recovery were those in the bottom two quintiles during the initial market fall. The lesson in this for investors is that anyone who sold out of a fund purely because it was a particularly poor performer when the market fell would have made an error. In fact, the best indicator of how well a fund was going to perform in the recovery was how poorly it had done just before that. This becomes even more interesting when you compare how funds performed over the combined periods against just the downturn. Unsurprisingly, there is a fairly large correlation between the funds that did well in the downturn, and those that did best over the full 10 months. This is a fundamental of investing – you want to minimise your losses. What is interesting, however, is that the second highest percentage of funds in the top quintile over the full 10 months were those in the bottom quintile during the downturn. Source: Morningstar A related point worth noting is that funds tracking a broad market index generally performed poorly in the downturn. The Satrix Alsi Index Fund, the CoreShares S&P South Africa Top 50 Fund and the Gryphon All Share Tracker were all in the bottom quintile for this three-month period. Source: Morningstar This is particularly notable, because only 21 of the 157 funds in this category underperformed the index. That is just 13.4%, which is way above long term averages. There is still a fair amount of debate around and research into whether active managers outperform in falling markets, but they certainly did so over this period. Investors were substantially better off with the average active manager than they were in an index tracker for these three months. What is more telling, however, is that that outperformance wasn’t sustained. Over the full 10-month period, two of the three index trackers were top quintile performers, and the third was at the top of the second quintile. Source: Morningstar In a complete reversal, the index trackers performed well ahead of the category average, and only 23 funds delivered a better return than the top-performing index tracker. Of those, five were smart beta funds, meaning that only 18 active managers outperformed. That is 11.5%. That is pretty remarkable given the extremely poor showing of index trackers in the initial market fall. Through the cycle, however, they showed significant resilience.