Japan’s Nippon Telegraph and Telephone (NTT) Corp has launched NTT Ltd following the merger of NTT Communications, Dimension Data and NTT Security into a single, US$11-billion business. It will be headquartered in London and be led by former Dimension Data CEO Jason Goodall. Though the Dimension Data brand falls away in markets around the world, the Middle East and Africa (MEA) operation will retain the long-established brand. Dimension Data was founded in the 1980s and was once South Africa’s largest IT group. It was listed on the JSE and the London Stock Exchange prior to its acquisition by NTT in 2010. In a statement on Monday, NTT gave no indication whether previously reported plans by Dimension Data MEA management to lead a buyout of the operation from the group were still proceeding. “Representing NTT within the MEA territory is Dimension Data MEA, which will retain the Dimension Data brand, along with subsidiary brands Internet Solutions, Merchants and Britehouse. This is due to strong brand equity in the territory, along with no direct NTT presence across the MEA territory,” NTT said. “Dimension Data will also continue to leverage NTT’s shared services, technology and platform investments.” Grant Bodley will continue to lead Dimension Data MEA as CEO. The merged NTT Inc has 40 000 employees in 70 countries and regions, NTT said. NTT Corp CEO Jun Sawada said: “We are excited to confirm that our global headquarters for NTT Ltd will be in London and that our commitment to the UK remains extremely strong. We considered several locations as the headquarters for NTT Ltd and made a deliberate decision to choose London. It has many benefits, including a stable economy, wealth of skills and talent, diversity in population and thinking, strong infrastructure, schools and housing for global talent moving to the city. In short, it’s a great city to live and work in, and we’re excited that we are making it the home for our new business.” — © 2019 NewsCentral Media This article was originally published on TechCentral here.