Here’s what caught our attention on Tuesday: 1. Eskom results South Africa’s embattled power utility is to release its 2018/2019 integrated annual results on Tuesday. Eskom is said to be weighed under debt of more than R440 billion and is expected to record a loss of at least R25 billion for the year through March. Bloomberg is reporting that the state-owned utility is not generating enough cash to service both its interest and debt payments. The government last week made provision to give Eskom a R59 billion cash injection over two years. Moody’s says the bailout is credit negative for the country. Jabu Mabuza, the utility’s chairman, was named interim CEO on Monday. Results are expected at 2pm on Tuesday. Read: Jabu Mabuza appointed as Eskom’s acting chief executive 2. Judgment day for Peter Moyo Peter Moyo, the axed Old Mutual CEO, is set to hear his fate at the Johannesburg High Court on Tuesday. Moyo was first suspended, and later dismissed from Old Mutual following what the insurer referred to as a ‘material breakdown in the relationship of trust and confidence’. The ex-CEO has been fighting two legal cases; to be reinstated as Old Mutual’s head and also to have both the board chair, Trevor Manuel and about 12 non-executive directors declared delinquent under Section 162 of the Companies Act. Read: Moyo wants the entire Old Mutual board to be purged 3. SA’s Q2 unemployment rate South Africa’s unemployment rate for the second quarter is due to be released by Stats SA on Tuesday. During the previous quarter ending March 2019, South Africa’s unemployment rate rose to 27.6% from 27.1% in the previous period. Job cuts were notable in financial services and in the construction sector. On a year-on-year basis, employment increased by 0.8% or 76 000 from March 2018. Update to follow. 4. Shoprite operational update South African retailer Shoprite released an operational update on Tuesday, which shows that its core SA businesses bounced back to full operational strength in the most recent quarter. The company says it saw a 6.5% increase in group sales, mainly due to its Supermarkets RSA operation growing sales by 7.4% in the six months ended June 2019 and a 9.4% increase in the final quarter. In the update, Shoprite says it expects to see a trading loss for the period, mostly due to increases in the cost of employment, rent and electricity and losses incurred from industrial action at its distribution centre. Heps is expected to be between 774.2 cents and 832.5 cents per share, a drop of 14.3% to 20.3%, compared with the restated figure of 971.4 cents during the same period a year ago. Shoprite adds that its non-RSA businesses also suffered as a result of forex shortages and weakness in the local currency. Read: Shoprite warns of lower annual earnings 5. Tshwane strike Municipal workers represented by the South African Municipal Workers’ Union (Samwu) are embarking on their second day of protest action in the Pretoria CBD on Tuesday. Workers are demanding an 18% wage increase, the same that was given to municipal directors and executives in 2017, according to Moneyweb. On Monday, streets in Pretoria were barricaded by buses and rubbish was thrown onto the streets in protest. An initial annual wage increase of 6.5% was agreed to at the bargaining council. Read: Tshwane workers demand 18% increase given to top managers