Judge Raymond Zondo opened Friday morning’s proceedings stating that at that point, he did not know what was going to happen. He had not been informed of the discussions that took place between the commission’s legal team and former president Jacob Zuma’s legal team the previous day. The position of the commission’s legal team, as expounded by evidence leader advocate Paul Pretorius during the course of the morning, is paraphrased below: Advocate Muzi Sikhakhane SC, counsel for Zuma, said that he will start at “the end”, and inform the commission that they will no longer participate in the proceedings. His reasons included an allegation that Zuma had been invited to the commission under “no rules”. Sikhakhane alleged that a crisis has been created because the evidence leader does not know what rules he is following. In the interests of brevity, I summarise Sikhakhane’s views, objections and further allegations made during the course of the morning: Sikhakhane wrapped up by saying that they will explore the option of going to court. The commission has become a political process. The left hand does not know what the right hand is doing. Judge Zondo made it clear that it was his decision to invite Zuma to the commission. This was an opportunity for him to tell his side of the story, and to enable Zondo and the evidence leader to put questions to him. Zuma accepted the invitation. The alternative was for the commission to subpoena Zuma. It is to be noted that Zuma has not yet furnished the commission with an affidavit, nor has he applied to cross-examine any witnesses. Zondo suggested a discussion in his chambers, where “there may be room to find a way”. Sikhakhane was in no rush to go to chambers – he accused Pretorius of being patronising, and of boasting about his powers. He further accused the commission’s legal team of being incompetent, twice, and then withdrew that remark and said they were inefficient. He begged Zondo to investigate whether his left hand (the legal team) was acting in good faith, without influence, and whether this treatment of witnesses was intended, or a mistake. Read: Zuma threatens ANC enemies after inquiry adjourns Surprisingly, a way was found. It was agreed that the commission’s legal team will provide Zuma’s legal representatives with a document – indicating the sections from witness testimonies where Zuma will be required to provide his side of the story. Has Zuma been given special concessions? Or, is Judge Zondo being shrewd? His conciliatory approach is making absolutely sure that Zuma will ultimately be compelled to deny or refute previous  allegations by witnesses. Zuma has not been precluded from testifying, he may have more time to ponder the matters on which he will be questioned, and discuss with his attorneys and counsel his response, but he will ultimately be required to present himself to the commission. If he refuses, the law requires that he be subpoenaed, and compelled to answer questions.