Turkey is probably going to remind emerging-markets traders the dangers of complacency this week. It’s a lesson that’s been in the making since May, when investors started to let their guards down and allowed their cautious optimism to morph into a wild search for yield, regardless of the risks. Murat Uysal, who unexpectedly replaced Murat Cetinkaya as central bank governor earlier this month, will announce his first interest-rate decision on Thursday. While every estimate compiled by Bloomberg assumes a reduction, they range from 50 to 800 basis points. Even so, the lira was the best performer in emerging markets last week, rising 1.1%. Read: Traders downplaying South Africa credit risk should heed Turkey “A serious meltdown in the lira last summer started on July 24, when the central bank shocked financial markets by keeping interest rates on hold, confounding expectations of a hike,” Ziad Daoud, the Dubai-based chief Middle East economist at Bloomberg Economics, wrote in a report. “Fast forward exactly one year and one day, and the central bank could trigger another currency crisis with a deeper-than-expected cut,” he said, adding the market is pricing in a 200-250 basis point reduction. Russia is expected to join the rate-cut conga chain at the end of the week, but a senior official at the central bank downplayed the chances of a return to hefty, half percentage-point reductions. The European Central Bank on Thursday is likely to set the stage for a September interest-rate cut and a possible resumption of quantitative easing.  “Conflicting signals in the global macro environment, with deteriorating macro factors being offset by dovish central-bank rhetoric, make us fairly cautious in our country picks even though the underlying trend is very positive for emerging markets,” said Anders Faergemann, a fund manager in London at PineBridge Investments. While he sees value in owning local-currency bonds as central banks in developing nations follow the Fed in cutting rates, he’s skeptical about further gains in emerging-market currencies as they are “getting to a point where they are cyclically overvalued.” Every currency has risen since May 17 after concern over global growth spurred the world’s most powerful central bankers to turn dovish. The upward trajectory sent a JPMorgan Chase & Co index that measures implied volatility tumbling to the lowest level since 2014, narrowing the difference in future swings between emerging and developed currencies to the smallest since March 2018. Cut! Cut! Cut! Inflation, trade war impact © 2019 Bloomberg L.P.