The chief executive of Johannesburg stock exchange JSE Ltd, Nicky Newton-King, will retire at the end of September after eight years at the helm of Africa‘s biggest securities exchange, the bourse said on Tuesday. “During 2018 Nicky indicated to the board a desire to step down, both for reasons of good governance and after such a long career at the JSE,” Chairman Nonkululeko Nyembezi said in a statement. She made her decision “so that the next stage of the JSE’s journey could be led by someone new,” Nyembezi said. The board has appointed Commonwealth Bank of Australia executive Leila Fourie as group CEO with effect from October 1, the firm said. Read the full announcement below JSE 201907300048A Retirement of CEO and appointment of new CEO JSE LIMITED (Incorporated in the Republic of South Africa) (Registration number: 2005/022939/06) Share Code: JSE ISIN Code: ZAE000079711 (‘JSE’ or ‘the Group’) RETIREMENT OF CEO AND APPOINTMENT OF NEW CEO In compliance with paragraph 3.59 of the JSE Listings Requirements, shareholders are advised that Nicky Newton-King will retire as Chief Executive Officer of the JSE on 30 September 2019. The Board has appointed Dr Leila Fourie as Group Chief Executive Officer, effective 1 October 2019. Nicky Newton-King – retiring Chief Executive Nicky has been Chief Executive for the past eight years, having previously served as the JSE’s Deputy CEO for eight years and, prior to that, in various other executive roles in a 23 year career at the JSE. In this time, Nicky has driven significant milestones, not least the demutualisation and listing of the JSE, the acquisition of the SA Futures Exchange and the Bond Exchange of SA, and the joint venture with FTSERussell. As CEO, Nicky has also led the Group through the successful implementation of a number of major technology projects which have fundamentally transformed the JSE’s trading and clearing service offerings and has championed the importance of business being a socially responsible participant on matters critical to the National agenda. These initiatives have contributed substantially to the JSE’s positioning as a leading, multi-asset class exchange, and have enabled the significant growth experienced by the JSE over the past decade. Nonkululeko Nyembezi, JSE Chairman notes that: ‘During 2018 Nicky indicated to the Board a desire to step down, both for reasons of good governance and after such a long career at the JSE, so that the next stage of the JSE’s journey could be led by someone new. The Board has, with great regret, accepted her decision. The Board joins me in thanking Nicky for putting her heart and soul into the JSE over the past 23 years. She leaves the JSE stronger, more diverse, more technologically advanced, commercially savvy and client focused; well positioned to continue building on its successes in the current landscape.’ Nicky Newton-King notes that: ‘It has been the privilege of a lifetime to lead the JSE. Having led and been involved in so many of the JSE’s key strategic initiatives over the last 23 years my finger prints are on much of the DNA of the JSE today. But, after eight years as Deputy CEO and eight years as CEO, I feel it is appropriate to step down – there is a time at which a CEO needs to step back and allow an institution to be led by a new energy and that time, for me, is now.’ Nicky will be available to the JSE and to Leila until the end of 2019. Dr Leila Fourie – incoming Group Chief Executive Following an extensive search, the Board is delighted to announce that Leila Fourie has been appointed as CEO with effect from 1 October 2019. Leila is a seasoned business executive having previously served as an executive director of the JSE, and her career of more than 25 years spans the capital markets, payment systems, consulting, investment banking and retail banking. Through the course of her career, Leila has held senior executive positions and directorships of global portfolios and local and US boards. Leila holds a PhD in Economic & Financial Sciences and is a Graduate of the Australian Institute of Company Directors (GAICD). Nonkululeko Nyembezi notes that: ‘Leila has extensive and diverse experience in local and multinational companies, including Commonwealth Bank of Australia, the Australian Payments Network, Accenture and Standard Bank. Leila brings a wealth of experience in capital market products and technology to the JSE and so it is a particular pleasure to welcome her back to the JSE and South Africa.’ ‘I am thrilled to be returning to the JSE and look forward to working with the JSE team to continue building the JSE’s position as a leading emerging market exchange,’ says Leila Fourie. Sandton 30 July 2019 Sponsor RAND MERCHANT BANK (A division of FirstRand Bank Limited) Date: 30/07/2019 03:55:00 Produced by the JSE SENS Department. The SENS service is an information dissemination service administered by the JSE Limited (‘JSE’). The JSE does not, whether expressly, tacitly or implicitly, represent, warrant or in any way guarantee the truth, accuracy or completeness of the information published on SENS. The JSE, their officers, employees and agents accept no liability for (or in respect of) any direct, indirect, incidental or consequential loss or damage of any kind or nature, howsoever arising, from the use of SENS or the use of, or reliance on, information disseminated through SENS.