Here’s what caught our attention on Monday: 1. Dan Matjila to appear at the PIC inquiry The former CEO of the Public Investment Corporation, Dan Matjila, is due to make his first appearance at the PIC inquiry on Monday. Matjila, who was ousted in November 2018, will be testifying on matters relating to the PIC’s rescue of Edcon. According to Bloomberg, Matjila is due to tell the inquiry that one of the reasons for his dismissal was his opposition of Edcon’s bailout, which he felt did not meet the investment criteria of the PIC’s clients. Since the start of the inquiry, Matjila has been implicated in a number of testimonies for his involvement in questionable and dubious transactions. Read: PIC’s Matjila to say he was ousted to facilitate Edcon rescue 2. Steinhoff CFO steps down Steinhoff’s CFO, Philip Dieperink will be stepping down by mutual consent from both his membership of the management board of Steinhoff and as CFO on August 31, 2019. Dieperink will leave Steinhoff in December following a handover period. He will be replaced by current operations director and member of the management board, Theodore de Klerk, who willl take over as CFO from September 1, 2019. 3. Joburg electricity tariff increases Residents of Joburg who use prepaid electricity could see an increase of up to 66% in the cost of power this month, thanks to a new fixed monthly surcharge of R200. According to Moneyweb, the surcharge will be included in municipal rate bills from July. In addition to this, the City of Johannesburg also introduced new tiers in its tariff structure, meaning that those users who consume more than 350 kWh in a month will see a significant increase in prices, before factoring in the new surcharge. According to Moneyweb, City Power has not provided reasons for introducing the new tariff. Read: Joburg’s prepaid electricity tariff shock 4. Implats trading statement Impala Platinum issued a trading statement for the year ended June 30, 2019 on Monday. The mining company is flagging a positive delivery in both basic and headline earnings per share on the back of an improved rand platinum group metals basket price and improved operational performance. The company sees earnings per share improving from a basic and headline loss per share of 1 486 cents and 171 cents respectively in the comparative previous period. The company says the improvement is in line with positive earnings reported in the half year ended December 31, 2019. Results will be released on or around September 5, 2019. 5. Rand update Better-than-expected US jobs data boosted the dollar, and weighed on the rand on Friday. The US added 224 000 jobs in June, although the unemployment rate increased to 3.7%. In South Africa, key mining and manufacturing data for May is due on Monday, while traders keep a close eye on international affairs, including the US Fed minutes, due out on Wednesday. The rand was at R14.22 to the dollar at 8:56 on Monday, as a soaring dollar pushed the local currency, along with its emerging market peers lower. Read: Rand weaker, tracking major currencies, as Fed cut bets fade