Here’s what caught our attention on Monday: 1. Conflict escalates at Old Mutual Peter Moyo is not taking his dismissal lying down. Moneyweb is reporting that the axed Old Mutual CEO is seeking an order from the Johannesburg High Court to declare Old Mutual chairman, Trevor Manuel, a delinquent director, citing an ‘ulterior motive’ and having ‘acted in bad faith’ when handling Moyo’s suspension from the insurer in May. Moyo was first suspended, and later dismissed from Old Mutual for a conflict of interest relating to NMT Capital, which he co-founded. Moyo has also reportedly launched a court application calling for his reinstatement as CEO. Read: It’s Moyo versus Manuel as Old Mutual drama escalates 2. Opening of tax season Today marks the opening of 2019’s tax filing season for personal income tax and related initiatives affecting individual taxpayers, with a media briefing to be hosted by Sars commissioner, Edward Kieswetter. In June, Kieswetter raised the tax threshold for submissions of returns from R350 000 to R500 000, meaning that only people earning more than R500 000 per year will be required to file tax returns. <a href="http://iono.fm/e/696141">Content hosted by iono.fm</a> 3. Discovery Bank opens to clients Discovery Bank is officially accepting new clients from today, almost three months later than it had originally anticipated. The behavioural bank was unveiled in November 2018 and is premised on making people healthier, but in a financial sense. Moneyweb is reporting that at the opening of its systems, Discovery Bank is targeting 1 000 clients per day as part of its early onboarding phase, until the end of August, adding that it would “scale further thereafter”. Read: Discovery slowly opens its bank ‘doors’ 4. New vehicle sales South Africa’s new vehicle trade sales for June are expected to be released on Monday. In May, vehicle sales dropped by 5.7% year-on-year to 40 506 units. According to Trading Economics, this was the fourth decline in five months – sales have dropped every month this year, except during April. Bloomberg reported last month that South Africa is struggling to gain economic momentum but, despite this, some automakers, including Mercedes-Benz, Toyota, Ford and BMW, are expanding their manufacturing fleet, helped by the state-incentive plan. 5. Rand update The rand strengthened during the latter part of Friday after South Africa registered a trade surplus in May and as sentiment improved ahead of the G20 summit taking place in Japan over the weekend. The local currency, along with its emerging market peers, continued to firm on Monday following the news of the trade truce struck on Saturday between the US and China, Reuters is reporting. Read: Rand stronger after US-China trade ceasefire Trump says China trade talks ‘back on track,’ new tariffs on hold In the week ahead, South Africa can expect Absa PMI, Sacci business confidence and foreign exchange reserves. The rand was at R14.06 at 8:47.