Here’s what caught our attention on Wednesday: 1. Eskom on borrowed time Eskom reported a R20.7 billion loss in its 2018/2019 integrated financial results for the year ending March 2019 on Tuesday. The dire position of the utility has prompted government to make provision for yet another cash bailout of R23 billion over the next three years. This is on top of the R59 billion cash injection, which was announced by finance minister Tito Mboweni last week. Public enterprises minister Pravin Gordhan says the bailouts will ensure Eskom’s status as a going concern for only 18 months, after which no more government money will be made available for the parastatal. On Tuesday Gordhan also announced the appointment of Freeman Nomvalo as Eskom’s chief restructuring officer. Nomvalo is the current CEO at Saica. His office is being tasked with interrogating Eskom’s current financial situation and providing measures to stabilise it. Read: Eskom has 18 months to get its house in order 2. Moyo reinstated as CEO at Old Mutual The High Court in Johannesburg spelled victory for Peter Moyo on Tuesday, as it ruled he is to be reinstated as Old Mutual’s CEO after finding his dismissal unlawful. The judge said that the insurer failed to follow the terms of Moyo’s employment contract when he was dismissed. In response, Old Mutual said it would immediately review and appeal the judgment, adding Moyo is “not required or permitted to resume his duties, pending the outcome of the appeal proceedings”. The battle continues. Read: Peter Moyo reinstated as Old Mutual CEO Old Mutual to appeal court ruling reinstating insurer’s ex-CEO 3. JSE CEO Nicky Newton-King to retire CEO of the JSE, Nicky Newton-King, announced her decision to retire from the South African bourse on Tuesday, in conjunction with the release of the group’s financial results. Newton-King has been the CEO of the JSE for eight years and says the group should now be led by someone new. She will be replaced by Dr Leila Fourie as group CEO. Read: JSE turnover declines, CEO to retire 4. June balance of trade South Africa’s balance of trade for June is expected to be released on Wednesday. In May, balance of trade surplus of R1.74 billion was reported from a trade deficit of R3.43 billion in April. According to data from Trading Economics, exports in May increased 8.1% while imports increased at a slower pace of 3%. 5. Glencore production report Multinational commodity company Glencore issued its 2019 half-year production report on Wednesday, in which it highlights increased output for cobalt (28%), zinc (8%) and coal (10%) compared to the half year report in 2018. Production decreases were reported for copper (5%) and nickel (11%). Glencore’s CEO, Ivan Glasenberg says its key assets in copper, coal, zinc and nickel performed ‘largely in line’ with expectations, with the exception of its African copper business, which did not meet the desired operational performance. Read: Glencore says African copper business below expectation