Daniel Matjila, the former head of South Africa’s Public Investment Corp., appears for a fourth day at an inquiry into whether the fund, which oversees about $150 billion of assets, deviated from its mission to safeguard the pensions of more than 1.2 million South African state workers. The inquiry has heard from about 70 witnesses — several of whom flagged Matjila as having played a key role in approving questionable deals. He’s denied any wrongdoing. Read: Matjila: ‘I am prudent with other people’s money’ Matjila – a victim of state capture? Here are the latest developments, updated throughout the day. Matjila has said he was removed so that politically connected people could influence the fund’s investment decisions Matjila is accused by a politician of borrowing R2.5 million ($176 000) from failed South African lender VBS Mutual Bank. Evidence leader Jannie Lubbe says a lifestyle audit shows no evidence that Matjila took out an irregular loan, and the ex-CEO has also denied the allegation Finance Minister Tito Mboweni increased PIC’s independence by ending the tradition of appointing his deputy as chairman while announcing a 14-strong interim board Wednesday Inquiry Commissioner Gill Marcus says PIC’s advisory fees are high and asks Matjila if there are ways to address that. He agrees and suggests fees should be linked to performance. Matjila says the PIC had in the past proposed to state electricity utility Eskom to swap some debt for equity in exchange for board and committee representation. Matjila says that of the about R90 billion ($6.45 billion) of Eskom bonds bought on behalf of its clients, R20 billion isn’t government guaranteed. Marcus asked if the PIC had talks with Eskom or relevant ministers about governance issues at the power utility. Matjila said the PIC did talk to Eskom management and provided them with conditions for further PIC investments. The PIC has a discretionary mandate for how it invests, but with parameters, Matjila says. For unlisted investments of more than R2 billion, the PIC must approach the Government Employees Pension Fund for approval. When Matjila left in November, he said listed investments had no such conditions. Matjila says the PIC was “in good shape when I left.” Marcus asks what Matjila means by that, because his testimony points to conflicts between functional issues and political motivations at the fund manager. Matjila responds that while the PIC is not without its problems, it has outperformed benchmarks. Highlights from Wednesday © 2019 Bloomberg L.P.