Sunday saw the release of the final report of the expert advisory panel on land reform and agriculture appointed by President Cyril Ramaphosa last September. The fact that farmers and entrepreneurs were invited to serve on the panel alongside academics and lawyers was encouraging, but the words of poet John Lydgate still come to mind – you can’t please of the people all the time. Indeed, it was noted that not all panel members agreed with all of the recommendations. One wonders which parts of the panel held sway. A brief summary of the actions proposed in the report The panel pays homage to the usual pie-in-the-sky dreams, hoping to create “an enabling environment for a higher rate of investment and more productive use of domestic investments” and the meaningless utterances to uplift the lot of the most downtrodden in our society – women, youth and people with disabilities. The euphemistic ‘failed effort’ The report gave an example of a “failed land acquisition effort”, but this had nothing to do with failure of willing buyer/willing seller, and everything to do with a no-care attitude of government officials, with the likelihood that the hard-working farmer – a 56-year-old single mother of five adult children – had no political ties. Will the envisaged land proposal be the answer to her prayers? Of course not. The report attempts to address the failure of land reform in establishing a new generation of sustainable households, small scale and commercial black farmers, in that there is no security of tenure, a lack of transfer of title deeds, and poor post-settlement support. This is due to the poor capability of the state, deficient coordination, limited and misaligned allocated resources, and “complicated by corruption”. Land reform is impacted by the following problems: Recommendations for immediate action Recommendations towards a consolidated land reform policy framework Longer-term recommendations: The panel claims that: “South Africans have taken the first steps and continue to show commitment and resilience.” Who are they talking about? Taxpayers have had enough, and there are simmering threats of a tax revolt. The impending downgrade to junk status is a dark cloud descending upon us. Land grabs are taking place in Lenasia where there are clashes between homeowners and alleged land invaders. There are continuing cries of “Give us back our land”. South Africans from all walks of life have been following the Public Investment Corporation (PIC) and state capture commissions of inquiry, and have been given a glimpse into corruption at the highest level, and the wasteful squandering of billions of rand. The army has had to be called in to quell the gang-related violence in the Cape Flats, an unprecedented move in a country that is not at war.