While early retirement may not be for everyone, financial freedom is something we are all going to have to achieve. Unless your retirement plan consists of living off your children, or seeing how many cans of baked beans you can buy with a grant from the South Africa Social Security Agency (the answer is around 150) you are going to need to become financially free by the time you stop working. Eventually the salary tap will be turned off, and you will need to find other ways to water your expense garden. It therefore stands to reason that one of the most important things to track with regards to our finances is our financial freedom percentage. In other words, we should be tracking how much of our expenses our current investments would be able to cover (and I would suggest keeping a close eye on that number as you continue along your career path). Tomorrow’s expenses, today’s investments It’s one of the things I track monthly on my journey towards early retirement and financial freedom. And while I do like to keep an eye on how my actual journey is playing out against my plan, my favourite chart is the one that shows how much of my planned retirement expenses could be covered by the income my current investments could generate. As at the end of June, the chart looks as follows: Source: Stealthy Wealth Using the 4% rule, my current investments would be able to generate a monthly income for me of around R4 788. My retirement expenses are currently estimated at around R28 069 per month. This means that I am currently 17.1% financially free, which may leave you wondering what your financial freedom percentage looks like. The financial freedom calculator It is fairly easy to calculate your financial freedom percentage. All you need is two numbers: Once you have those two values, drop them into the calculator below and it will spit out a value indicating how financially free you are. (More detail on how the calculation works a later on.)  Your total monthly expenses (R):  How much of your expenses could your investments cover?  Source: Stealthy Wealth Two ways to use the calculator What is important to address more thoroughly with regards to the above calculator is what we consider our “total monthly expenses” to be. As we plod along at the grindstone on our way to retirement, we may pick up things like home loans, a commute and children. These things could form a part of your current total expenses and so you will likely include them when using the calculator. Read: Commuting your way to happiness Your current expenses may however not accurately reflect what your actual expenses in retirement will be. If you still have some years to go at the grindstone, many of your current expenses will become irrelevant as the years tick by. Home loans get crushed, commutes disappear, and kids get booted out of the house to start their own lives. So your monthly expenses once you hit retirement may look very different to when you are still grinding it out. (On the flip side, don’t forget that there may be additional retirement expenses like travel and hobbies that require some thought). And so I encourage you to run a second set of numbers through the calculator. Have another look at your current expenses, and take a stab at imagining what they will be like once you are actually financially free. Then use that value for the total expense input of the calculator. Hopefully the second number is more encouraging. Out of interest, our current financial freedom percentage (excluding all income and expenses related to our rental property) is 13.76%. That’s lower than the 17.1% figure I mentioned at the beginning of the article (which uses our estimated retirement expenses) because, among other things, I don’t expect to have a bond repayment once I retire, and so our retirement expenses should be lower than they are now. The maths behind the calculator The financial freedom percentage calculation is fairly straightforward, and that’s thanks to the simplicity of the 4% rule (the rule of 300). This rule says that the amount you need in order to be financially free is 300 multiplied by your monthly expenses in retirement. In other words, the amount of potential monthly income your current investments could give you is simply your total investment value divided by 300. Then, to get the percentage of your expenses this income covers (in other words, to answer the question ‘How financially free are you?’), take your current potential income from investments and divide that by current expenses and multiply by 100. For example:  Source: Stealthy Wealth That calculation is somewhat messy, so let’s simplify it by moving some things around. Place the 100 into the top numerator and rewrite the monthly expenses as a fraction over one. Example: Source: Stealthy Wealth Now we can divide the 100 by the 300, which leaves a three in the denominator of the top fraction, and if you recall high school maths, we can move the bottom fraction to the top as long as we switch it around. All that leaves us with is a simple calculation: Source: Stealthy Wealth And that’s it! Your financial freedom percentage is simply the value of your current investments divided by three times your monthly expenses. How to improve your financial freedom number To get a higher financial freedom percentage, you can:  This article was originally published on the Stealthy Wealth blog here.