PepsiCo, which is listed on the Nasdaq in the US, has announced on Friday that it has entered into an agreement to acquire all outstanding shares of Pioneer Food Group for R110 per share, a 56.5% premium as of July 12. Pioneer Foods, which is listed locally on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange, noted the “firm intention” to purchase by PepsiCo in a Sens statement and that the transaction is one of PepsiCo’s largest outside of the US. The group says in its statement that this is a demonstration of PepsiCo’s belief in “South Africa’s potential and its long-term commitment to the country”. It adds that the transaction will contribute meaningfully to the growth of the SA economy. “It could also attract further foreign direct investment and reinforces the case that South Africa is an attractive destination for multinationals,” Pioneer’s statement reads. PepsiCo is looking to utilise SA as a springboard into the rest of Africa as it looks to target growth on the continent. “Pioneer Foods represents a differentiated opportunity for PepsiCo and allows us to immediately scale our business in Africa. Pioneer Foods forms an important part of our strategy to not only expand in South Africa, but further into sub-Saharan Africa as well,” PepsiCo said in a statement. It added that the acquisition, valued at approximately US $1.7 billion, will be funded through a combination of debt and cash, and “has been unanimously approved by the boards of directors of both companies”. The transaction is, however, subject to relevant regulatory approvals and a Pioneer Foods shareholder vote. Pioneer says in its Sens that the independent board, which was established in relation to the offer, has unanimously recommended the offer to its shareholders. According to the local group, ordinary shareholders who collectively hold 52.85% of the aggregate of the issued ordinary and Class A shares, “have furnished irrevocable undertakings to vote in favour of or accept the PepsiCo Offer”. PepsiCo said that the transaction forms part of its goal to become “faster and more locally focused”, and will create a new operating sector for sub-Saharan Africa, led by Eugene Willemsen. “Willemsen, who has been with PepsiCo for nearly 25 years, has extensive experience in growth markets, having previously led our businesses in Turkey and South East Europe,” the company said. Pioneer’s share price has responded positively to the news, and is up 28.87% to R100 as of 9:30am on Friday. Read the group’s full Sens statement here.