Former South African President Jacob Zuma is set to appear before a judicial panel for the first time today to answer accusations that he consented to and benefited from widespread looting during his nine-year rule. Lawyers for the commission of inquiry will question Zuma, 77, about claims by previous witnesses that he allowed members of the Gupta family, who were his friends, to influence his administration’s appointments and to flout government rules to further their business interests. He will also have to respond to testimony that he took bribes from services company Bosasa in exchange for political backing. Here are the latest developments, updated throughout the day. (Time-stamps are local time in Johannesburg.) Opening remarks (10:39) “I have been the subject of talk in this country for more than a decade I have been vilified, alleged to be the king of corrupt people and the most corrupt,” Zuma says in his opening remarks to the commission. “This commission from my understanding was really created to have me coming here and perhaps to find things on me.” Lawyer reservations (10:32) Zuma’s lawyer, Muzi Sikhakhane, said he had reservations about the ex-president appearing before the commission, complaining that his client hasn’t been given sufficient opportunity to prepare for questions he may face. “We believe that had we been given an opportunity to prepare Mr. Zuma, to advise him about people’s names that he may mention, that he can’t do so without those people being given notice, this process today would be much better.” Zuma arrives (10:04) Zuma arrived at the hearing to the sounds of cheering and applause in the public gallery. Heavy security (8:14) There’s a heavy security presence in and around the building in northern Johannesburg where the inquiry is being held. Zuma’s hearing is scheduled to begin at 10 a.m. The former president appeared in high spirits on Sunday, when he posted a short video of himself on Twitter: I thought I should brighten up your day pic.twitter.com/T9kJgBUZz8 — Jacob G Zuma (@PresJGZuma) July 14, 2019 Police barricades (7:35) Police have erected barricades around the perimeter of the building where the inquiry is being heard in anticipation of the arrival of hundreds of Zuma’s supporters, who object to his appearance before the commission. #StateCaptureInquiry It’s getting busier here in Parktown where the state capture inquiry takes places. Police cars, media and members of the public are making their way inside the venue where former President Jacob Zuma is set to appear. LM pic.twitter.com/SGwNXvaF1L — EWN Reporter (@ewnreporter) July 15, 2019