At the Allan Gray Investment Summit this week a prominent local asset manager derided the S&P Indices Versus Active (Spiva) scorecard that is published twice a year in South Africa as ‘fake news’. The scorecard compares the performance of local active equity managers against the S&P South Africa Domestic Shareholder Weighted (DSW) Capped Index. To the end of 2018, less than a quarter of local managers outperformed. The manager argued that this result is meaningless because no local equity funds benchmark themselves against this index, and it was therefore a pointless comparison. His argument is not, however, only wrong. It is wrong-headed. Here’s why: 1. Active managers struggle to beat their own benchmarks If this manager was unhappy with managers being measured against a benchmark they don’t use, the obvious remedy would be to compare them against the benchmarks they do. The problem is the results are no better. According to figures from Morningstar and obtained by Moneyweb from fund fact sheets, only 27.3% of actively managed funds in the South African equity general category have outperformed their own benchmarks over the past five years. The table below shows the figures for one, three and five years. Source: Morningstar and fund fact sheets Over all of these time periods, somewhere between just under a quarter and just over a third of active managers have beaten their own benchmarks. Only 14 of them have beaten their own benchmarks over all three time periods. That is 15.9%. 2. The ruse Any index is simply a representation of the market. The Spiva scorecard may use an index that is not widely followed, but what it does give is a representation of how an equity fund manager’s investible universe as a whole has performed. It also does this a lot better than some other indices. This is because it caps any stock at 10%, which is in line with what managers would do in their own funds. It also adjusts stock weightings to reflect their percentage of South African ownership – in other words the shares that are actually available for local managers to trade. Of course it is worth questioning whether the S&P South Africa Domestic Shareholder Weighted (DSW) Capped Index represents some sort of particularly demanding benchmark. It might not be fair to compare active managers against an index that for some reason is way out of line with others. The table below compares its return against the benchmarks most commonly used by equity fund managers: the FTSE/JSE All Share Index, the FTSE/JSE All Share SWIX Index, and the FTSE/JSE Capped All Share SWIX Index. Source: S&P Dow Jones Indices, FTSE Russell As this table shows, the S&P South Africa Domestic Shareholder Weighted (DSW) Capped Index shows the lowest return of all the market indices over both three and five years. In other words, it has actually been the easiest of these benchmarks to beat. Its performance is also not substantially different to that of the Capped SWIX over any of these periods. Comparing active managers against this index is therefore neither unreasonable, nor inappropriate. 3. The challenge The fundamental problem with the fund manager’s presentation, however, was his attempt to refashion an argument that has already been settled. The active versus passive question is moot. Active is not intrinsically better than passive, and neither is passive intrinsically better than active. What is important is how investors can best use both of these strategies to help them achieve their objectives. Unfortunately, this is where active managers have a serious Achilles heel. The fundamental problem with the active management industry is that the vast majority of managers are selling, and charging, for the same thing: outperformance. Yet, logically, they can’t all do it. Regardless of which benchmark you use, it is impossible for every active manager to outperform. Even if you use the least ambitious benchmark for an equity fund – which is the category average – at best 50% of them are going to be successful. Yet South Africa has over 150 general equity funds, which is almost the same as the number of stocks in the FTSE/JSE All Share Index. It has become as challenging to select a fund manager as it is to pick a stock. Active managers would make it much easier for investors if they offered a unique value proposition, which only some do. Most, however, continue to insist on selling something they cannot be sure they will even be able to deliver. How is any investor supposed to feel that they can get value for money in that environment? Active managers need to think about that seriously. Because the truth is that the biggest threat they face is not passive management. It is their own hubris and inability for proper introspection.