Here’s what caught our attention on Friday: 1. Investors in illegal schemes get compensation A report by the Prudential Authority, published on Thursday, shows that the South African Reserve Bank repaid R368 million to the investing public that was lost to illegal schemes such as pyramid and ponzi schemes. Moneyweb is reporting that the repayments were made from assets seized from TVI Tracel and Marketing Agency CC, Defences and various others. The Reserve Bank’s deputy governor, Kuben Naidoo says TVI was flagged as one of the largest illegal deposit-taking schemes and one of Sarb’s greatest successes as far as recovery was concerned. Read: Investors in illegal schemes get R368m back 2. AfriForum is not taking Tshwane tariff changes lightly AfriForum is taking legal action against the City of Tshwane and energy regulator, Nersa for what the organisation alleges is unlawful implementation of increased electricity tariffs in the region. According to Moneyweb, the city implemented the proposed tariff changes without Nersa’s approval, after both AfriForum and Electricity Resellers’ Association of South Africa raised concerns around the structural impact on specific consumers. The city, however, says that the its proposed tariff increase is within the Nersa guideline of 13.07%. The matter is being taken to the Pretoria High Court. Read: Tshwane tariff fight heads to court 3. Finmin and governor select two candidates for vacant posts Finance minister Tito Mboweni and Sarb governor Lesteja Kganyago have agreed to recommend two names to the president to fill the posts of two Sarb deputy governors. The talks come after the resignations of both Daniel Mminele and Francois Groepe during the first half of the year. According to Bloomberg, Mboweni says both candidates are gender and race balanced – given that there is one male and one female. The final decision will be left to the president. Read: Mboweni says Sarb candidates gender, race balanced 4. Denel asks state for cash injection South Africa’s arms manufacturer, Denel is turning to the state for a R2.8 billion cash injection to help it emerge out of a financial crisis and to help it secure profitable export deals. Reuters is reporting that the state-owned entity hopes that the announcement will be made soon and that the funds will arrive between September and October. Read: Denel asks for R2.8bn state cash injection – CEO 5. Rand update The rand’s movements are hinged on developments in the US, ahead of employment data and as expectations of an interest rate cut in July grows. Reuters is reporting that an interest rate cut would likely provide further relief to emerging markets across the board. This past week saw South Africa’s business confidence increase marginally by 0.3 index points for June, while Absa PMI rose to 46.2 in June on the back of increased business activity and new sales order. The rand reached a three-month high during early trade on Thursday, while on Friday, the currency was at R14.06 to the dollar at 9:50am. Read: Rand steady as market awaits US jobs report Emerging market currencies likely have seen the best of 2019