Here’s what caught our attention on Friday: 1. The AA’s solution to the e-toll problem Suspending e-tolls in Gauteng and reimbursing motorists who have made payments since the dawn of the implementation in 2013, is a sensible solution to the e-toll saga on the Gauteng Freeway Improvement Project (GFIP). This is according to a study conducted by the Automobile Association, which it says indicates that people will not pay under the current conditions. Instead, the association says a ring-fenced e-toll levy linked to the General Fuel Levy can be used to fund the GFIP. Read: Scrapping e-tolls a viable solution – AA 2. PIC chair board appointed Following a mass exit of PIC board members when the commission of inquiry into the state asset management began, a new board with former Eskom and Nedbank chairman, Reuel Khoza, at the helm has now been appointed. Khoza currently holds the same role at AKA Capital and Dzana Investments. Sindi Mabaso-Koyana, who is currently the executive chair of African Women Chartered Accountants Investment Holdings, as well as the non-executive chair of MTN Zakhele Futhi, has been elected deputy chair of the PIC. Khoza said the PIC, which has been without a CEO since the resignation of Dan Matjila in November 2018, will ‘hopefully’ get one in the next six months. Read: PIC board ‘fully autonomous’ 3. State capture inquiry The Estina Dairy Farm saga continues to be the focal point at the state capture inquiry. The commission will again hear evidence from Willie Basson, a businessman in Vrede. On Thursday, the commission heard evidence from Doctor Radebe, former DA councillor of the Phumelele Municipality in Vrede. The scandal concerns R200 million paid to Gupta-linked Estina, funds which had been set aside for emerging farmers in Vrede. 4. Eskom rescue dampens SA sentiment Ratings agency Moody’s is not taking the government’s bailout of Eskom lightly. It said on Thursday that government’s bailout for debt-laden Eskom is ‘credit negative’ for South Africa and will place a further drain on the already exhausted fiscus. The announcement comes after finance minister Tito Mboweni presented a special appropriation bill to parliament to fund Eskom. The government has made provision to give Eskom R59 billion over two years to help it service its debts. Read: Rand slides as Moody’s warns Eskom rescue risks Eskom gets bailout funding. Now it needs a rescue plan 5. Rand update The rand fell to its lowest in two weeks on Thursday following the Moody’s comments on South Africa’s sovereign being ‘credit negative’ after government’s cash injection for Eskom. During the week, the rand remained stable after the inflation rate for June remained unchanged at 4.5% and producer price inflation increasing 5.8% in June. In the US, a possible interest rate cut is on the cards, while the ECB decided to keep rates unchanged for the time being. Boris Johnson wins the race to take over as PM in the UK and Turkey cut its interest rate by 450 basis points to help aid the recession-hit economy. On Friday, the rand was at R14.16 at 9:40.