Here’s what caught our attention on Friday: 1.Ramaphosa ensures job security at Eskom President Cyril Ramaphosa has assured the 47 000 workers at Eskom that they will not lose their jobs when the utility is split into three. When the presidency announced its plan to split the state-owned power utility into three, for efficiency and better operational performance, it faced a backlash from labour unions concerned about employees. Despite the World Bank saying Eskom’s labour force is 66% too high, Ramaphosa says more needs to be done to strengthen and restructure Eskom so no job losses are suffered. Read: Ramaphosa promises no job losses at Eskom 2.Government assures on loan from CDB to Eskom Last month government had to provide funds to Eskom in an emergency bailout, after monies promised from the Chinese Development Bank (CDB) were not received on time. Addressing the concerns relating to the $2.5 billion loan facility from the CDB, the public enterprises ministry said the loan to Eskom is not in jeopardy and instead assured that both government and Eskom are working to ensure the flow of funds from the CDB to Eskom. Read: SA says Chinese loan to Eskom not in jeopardy 3. Berkshire Hathaway to hold AGM on Saturday Multinational company Berkshire Hathaway will be holding its annual general meeting on Saturday in Omaha, in the US. The company’s CEO and chairman Warren Buffet said during an interview on Thursday that the company has been buying shares in Amazon and that the purchases will be evident in the regulatory filing later in the month. Buffet confirmed seeing the value of the tech giant, saying he is a “fan” of the online retail giant. Read: Buffett finally embraces Amazon as Berkshire acquires a stake 4.Intu Properties trading update Real estate investment trust company Intu Properties released a trading statement for the period between January 1 2019 to May 2 2019, in which it highlights a stable operational performance during the quarter. CEO Matthew Roberts says it continued to see good letting activity, with at least 53 long-term leases signed, which amounted to £6 million in annual rent. Despite the stable performance in the quarter, the company says it expects the rest of the year to be challenging due to a higher-than-expected level of company voluntary arrangements and a slowdown in new lettings, as tenants feel the uncertainty of political and retail environments. Results are expected to be released in July. 5.Standard Bank comes under fire for double charging The Eastern Cape High Court heard a case in which Standard Bank had been accused of double charging the arrears amount owed by a mortgage client, which resulted in the Homewood Guest lodge being repossessed and auctioned at half its market value. According to Moneyweb the guest lodge fell short of R833 000 in arrears on an outstanding loan of R3.77 million. In response to allegations, Standard Bank says the case has no merit and asked for it to be dismissed with punitive costs. Read: Standard Bank accused of ‘double dipping’ in home repo case