I have been following the debate around the issue of Regulation 28 over the past week, and as with every other flare up of this debate, I am disappointed. It tends to centre on issues of expected return and the supposed prejudice of younger investors who should have a lot more exposure to equities. The debate has of late focused on the relatively low exposure to offshore assets. Read: Is Regulation 28 too restrictive? When considering the reasons for people retiring with insufficient capital, underexposure to equity and offshore does not feature high on the list. According to a 2017/2018 Sanlam Benchmark Survey and other research, individuals retire with insufficient capital because: The issue of underexposure to equities affects a minority of investors; those who are investing for their retirement. And here the benefits of full exposure to growth assets (equities, listed property, offshore) are really only enjoyed by a handful of these investors who are able to stomach the volatility associated with them. Read: The impact of Regulation 28 on returns The oft-quoted Dalbar study shows that most US equity investors receive far lower returns (3.88%) compared to the market (5.62%) because of their behaviour. These figures were for the 20 years ending December 31, 2018. Equity investors tend to sell after markets have fallen a lot, and buy back in after markets have delivered strong returns. So they miss out on all that extra return on offer anyway. Judging by local unit trust inflow and outflow statistics over the years, these behaviours are less pronounced with balanced funds (Regulation 28-compliant funds). The 2018 Dalbar study showed that equity investors remained invested for an average of 3.55 years while asset allocation (balanced funds) investors remained invested for an average of 4.59 years. So Regulation 28 may actually help investors stick to their investment strategy, but at a cost of some additional return (which investors may be foregoing anyway by their behaviours). Sector performance 1 year 5 years 10 years 20 years SA Equity General -8.8% 3.9% 10.5% 14.7% SA Multi Asset High Equity -3.6% 5% 9.5% 12.5% SA Interest Bearing Short Term 8% 7.5% 7.3% 9.4% SA Money Market 7.3% 7% 6.6% 8.4% Inflation 5.2% 5.4% 5.4% 5.5% Source: Profile Media The table above shows compound annualised growth rates for the periods to December 31, 2018. The outperformance of equities over balanced funds (multi-asset high equity) was meaningful at 2.2% per annum. However, the research suggests that more balanced investors actually experienced those returns than equity investors. The higher volatility of growth assets triggers the bad behaviours that result in investors deviating from their long-term investment and retirement plans. A trend that gives me confidence that this debate will fizzle out over time is the rise of passive balanced funds. These are cheap balanced funds with exposure to various asset classes, but cost a fraction of their actively managed counterparts. The Nedgroup Core Diversified Fund has the longest track record of such a fund, and has outperformed the JSE All Share Index since its inception in 2009. The Satrix Balanced Index Fund and Sygnia Skeleton 70 Fund have achieved the same thing since their inception in 2013. A number of the large actively managed balanced funds have also outperformed the JSE since their respective inception dates. These include Allan Gray, Investec, Coronation, Prudential, Foord and others. Other more recent start-ups like Obsidian, ClucasGray and others have also achieved this. The main problem with the traditional Regulation 28 debate is that investors are human while markets are not. Equity and offshore markets have delivered higher returns over time, but with high levels of volatility. This volatility triggers those destructive human behaviours, which result in investors achieving lower returns than the market. This phenomenon is less pronounced with Regulation 28 funds. It is also possible to outperform equity markets with the right strategy within the confines of Regulation 28. ‘The fault, dear investor, is not in our stars – and not in our stocks – but in ourselves …’ – Benjamin Graham. Craig Gradidge CFP® is an investment and retirement planning specialist at Gradidge-Mahura Investments.