Here’s what caught our attention on Thursday: 1. Absa PMI Absa’s Purchasing Managers Index (PMI) for April increased to 47.2 points from 45.0 points in March, its highest in four months, after business activity and new sales orders increased. The index gauges manufacturing activity in South Africa. According to Reuters, Absa says the lack of load shedding during the month may have supported the slight improvement in sentiment. Read: Absa PMI rises in April as blackout fears ease 2. Total new vehicle sales South Africa’s total new vehicle sales data for April is expected to be released on Thursday. In March, vehicle sales decreased by 3.1% to 47 718 units year-on-year, on the back of subdued consumer confidence as the economy slows. Vehicle sales however increased on a monthly basis from 43 251 units in February, data from Trading Economics shows. Update to follow. Read: Weak vehicle sales show negative consumer confidence in a low growth climate 3. Elections countdown Tensions and campaigning are on the rise and by this time next week, we’d hope for votes to be counted and a result to be announced. A lot of commentary is floating around on the expected outcome of the 2019 national elections. Goldman Sachs for one is predicting that a strong ANC win would boost SA asset prices, saying a strong mandate for structural reform needs to come out of these elections. Citizens are however upset over numerous corruption scandals the ruling party was named in, saying the party won’t get their vote. Elections, we anticipate. Read: Strong ANC win would boost South African asset prices, Goldman says Anger at corruption dents faith in Ramaphosa, ANC before poll South Africa’s outlook post May 8 4. State capture inquiry With the commission turning its focus to the criminal justice sector and law enforcement agencies, former Kwa-Zulu Natal head of Hawks, Johan Booysen is set to resume his testimony on Thursday. Booysen previously described to the commission how he was unlawfully instructed to stop his investigation into businessman Thoshan Panday by the KZN provincial commissioner, further adding that cases against Panday and his accomplice were withdrawn after being they were arrested, EWN is reporting. 5. Rand update Local datasets on Tuesday, including the money supply, balance of trade and private sector credit swung the rand in a pendulum. All three indicators reported an increase during March. The rand was however mostly impacted by events in the US, after the Fed held the benchmark interest rate steady on Wednesday. On Thursday, the rand was at R14.45 to the dollar at 8:26. Read: Rand firmer after US Fed holds lending rates