The May 31 deadline for financial service providers (FSPs) to accumulate mandatory continuous professional development (CPD) points is fast approaching. As FIA national manager for compliance Joe Kotzé explains, members of the Insurance Institute of South Africa (IISA) and/or the Financial Planning Institute (FPI), must complete CPD activities to retain their professional designations. The number of points required varies according to the FSP. The 12-month Financial Advisory and Intermediary Services (FAIS) CPD cycle runs from June 1 to May 31, with this year’s cycle the first where accumulating sufficient points is mandatory in order for FSPs to retain their professional accreditations. The pressure is on. The Moneyweb CPD Hub seeks to address this urgency, delivering high-quality FAIS-accredited CPD content, that’s cost-effective and easily accessible from your phone, tablet or PC, online or offline. Moneyweb has partnered with accredited IOBSA and FPI CPD service provider and registered FSP Black Onyx, which powers the system, and creates relevant videos, podcasts, eBooks, and newsletters from asset managers and industry stakeholders on investing, wealth management, financial planning and regulation. There are 18+ CPD points available; one hour is equivalent to one CPD point, and this is tracked on the system. To earn verifiable CPD points, you must subscribe to one of five packages – ranging from basic to advanced corporate packages for multiple users – then complete an assessment based on the content you’ve watched or read at the end of each module. You must achieve at least 60% to pass, within three attempts. Verifiable CPD Certificates for each mini-course are generated online for download. Basic users will only receive individual certificates, while optimal, corporate or platinum users will receive a monthly scorecard and a comprehensive, complete CPD certificate documenting all the complete mini-courses. Click here to visit The Moneyweb CPD Hub, watch the video below for more information, and try the free trial here.  