With the much-anticipated national elections almost upon us, a steady stream of speculation, prediction and analysis has intensified regarding the precise election results come voting day on May 8. However, from an investment perspective, the more significant factors at play are being clouded by this kind of short-term noise. While the election results will certainly be a critical determinant for SA’s future, there are longer-term themes driving the markets, which investors would do well to consider. Read: Elections 2019: How to position your portfolio Analysts are predicting that, should the ANC win say 56% or more, Ramaphosa will then have a free hand to do what needs to be done to turn the country around, but should the ANC fall below this level, they expect the populists could emerge more dominant and Ramaphosa becomes a lame duck President. Looking at recent polls, it does seem likely that the ANC will win the election with more support than they received in the local elections of 2016, but with less support than in the last national election in 2014. However, while the election may give some indication as to Ramaphosa’s support, it is less likely to give us a clear idea of the balance of power between Ramaphosa and the populist faction within the ANC. The election, while probably important for the long-term outlook of the country, is not the binary that the ANC’s presidential election in December 2017 was. Then financial markets faced two starkly different outcomes: a continuation of the pro-Zuma faction based on a Dlamini-Zuma victory versus a break from the past with a shot at governance and growth-enhancing reforms through a Ramphosa victory. Given that these two potential outcomes had reasonably predictable consequences for asset prices, we implemented derivative structures in our portfolios ahead of the ANC election to hedge the potential for a surprise victory by Ramaphosa. However, when looking at the upcoming election, we don’t see it as having the same binary outcome. For instance, at this point, how do we interpret a 55% win versus a 58% win? Instead, investors should be paying closer attention to the key longer-term themes driving markets. The bad news is that one of the key long-term themes at work in the market is the decline in long-term growth. The initial drop in GDP growth in 2009 was largely due to the external shock of the global financial crisis, however, the subsequent deterioration is largely self-inflicted. Government has failed to implement policies that would improve the country’s potential growth rate – such as policies to free up competition in labour and goods markets, to improve the supply of skilled labour and to reduce the cost of key inputs, like energy. Moreover, under the mantle of state capture, we’ve also seen steady and rapid deterioration in governance, with very negative consequences for business confidence and broader economic activity. As a result, private sector investment remains extremely low. For financial markets, low growth has been visible in recent years in the very weak levels of profitability of many South African companies; in part, explaining the significant underperformance of the South African equity market. The good news is that the election of Ramaphosa as ANC president in 2017 marked a turning point. While many South Africans are unhappy with the pace of change, there has however been steady progress in turning around key government institutions since Ramaphosa became President of South African in 2018. Ramaphosa has overseen the appointment of state-owned enterprises boards and management; the appointment of a credible Sars Commissioner and, critically, the appointment of the respected Shamila Batohi as National Director of Public Prosecutions. We believe these changes should improve governance over time, which is necessary to rebuild confidence in South Africa. I call this theme the ‘Winds of Change’. Over time, it will result in lower risk premiums being embedded in South African assets. It can also result in better confidence in South Africa’s long-term future and this should lead to somewhat higher growth. We’ll be watching carefully in the weeks and months following the election to see how this theme evolves. Critical signposts will be how effectively Ramaphosa restructures his administration and how he handles the restructuring of Eskom. In addition, the markets have priced in a lot of the bad news. A good yardstick on how much bad news is being priced in, is the yield on South African government bonds. Currently, the 10-year government bond yield is just over 9% compared to inflation of 4.6% – giving a real yield of about 4.5%. Bar the late 1990s when emerging markets were in a period of crisis and the SA monetary authorities were attempting to bring inflation down to single digits, real yields have seldom been higher than 4%. It’s no surprise then that the funds I manage holds significant positions in government bonds. I have also gradually increased my exposure to SA equities as they have become cheaper. In particular, we have added exposure to locally-oriented companies on attractive valuations that will benefit from any improvement in the South African outlook. John Orford is an Old Mutual Stable Growth fund manager. The views and opinions shared in this article belong to their author, cannot be construed as financial advice, and do not necessarily mirror the views and opinions of Moneyweb.