Election years are all about politicians making promises, parties seeking to strengthen their positions, and disgruntled individuals and interest groups voicing their concerns. South Africa has been no different, making 2019 a good time to review the economy and form an opinion of where the strengths and weaknesses lie and what we would like to change. Without a comparison to the rest of the world, we lack context regarding which areas of our economy can be perceived as strengths and weaknesses. The World Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Index (GCI) – which ranks 140 countries based on 12 pillars, each of which contain multiple sub-points – can assist in this regard. SA’s ranking per global competitiveness pillar Pillar Rank out of 140 Institutions 69 Infrastructure 64 ICT adoption 85 Macroeconomic stability 57 Health 125 Skills 84 Product market 74 Labour market 55 Financial system 18 Market size 35 Business dynamism 56 Innovation capability 46 Source: WEF Global Competitiveness Index 2018 Overall, South Africa is three positions away from being at the midpoint of all nations assessed by the WEF, coming in at 67 out of 140 (changing only marginally from 62 out of 135 in 2017). Comparing the ranking of each of these pillars, it is evident that South Africa’s relative strength lies within its financial system whereas its largest weakness lies within health. This is not surprising as South Africa has had a long-standing reputation for its financial system’s strength of governance and regulation. Conversely, South Africa has a reputation for a relatively short life span as well as an inefficient health care system. The following table unpacks the sub-points within each pillar that ranked in the best 30 and worst 30 positions. SA’s best and worst sub-points per global competitiveness pillar Strengths Rank Weaknesses Rank Institutions Freedom of press 26 Organised crime 125 Conflict of interest regulation 11 Homicide rates 135   Reliability of police service 119 Infrastructure Road connectivity 5   ICT Adoption Mobile telephone subscription 9   Health   Healthy life expectancy 124 Skills   Digital skills 116 Labour market Redundancy costs 26 Hiring and firing practices 111 Worker rights 25 Cooperation in labour relations 136 Labour tax rate 14 Flexibility of wage determination 133 Financial system Domestic credit to private sector 11   Market capitalisation 2   Insurance premium 3   Business dynamism Cost of starting a business 4 Time to start a business 128 Insolvency regulatory framework 24   Source: WEF Global Competitiveness Index 2018 The second table reveals more than the first regarding the South African economy’s strengths and weaknesses. Within the Institutions pillar, the primary weakness seems to be around crime and law enforcement while the strengths are freedom of the press and conflict of interest regulation. Grouping the Infrastructure and ICT adoption pillars shows that South Africa’s road and mobile networks are strong in comparison to other nations. This is a significant positive as it promotes access to cities and access to information for the population. South Africa’s lack of digital skills is concerning given that the world is entering the fourth industrial revolution, which is expected to be characterised by artificial intelligence taking on a much larger role in the global economy. South Africa’s life expectancy is relatively short in comparison to other nations, and an alarming indicator of the state of health and health services in the country. The labour market is a conflicted pillar as it features a number of positives and negatives. The negatives centre mainly on rigidity and engagement in the labour market. Conversely, workers’ rights and our progressive labour tax rates are viewed in a positive light in relation to other nations. Shining light Our financial system, long seen as a shining light of the South African economy, continues to be comparable to the best financial systems in the world. We rely heavily on small and medium-sized businesses for value and job creation, and the cost of starting a business is low by international standards. In contrast, the time and administration involved in starting a business is long compared to other nations, which can be a deterrent to starting one’s own business. Our top achievement is being ranked second in the world in terms of stock market capitalisation (after Hong Kong). The above suggests that although sentiment around the South African economy has become increasingly dim, there are positives. Certain aspects within our institutions, infrastructure, labour market and business environment should be celebrated for being positively comparable with the international market. Our financial system deserves special mention as it continues to be a shining light in economy. In contrast, crime, health, lack of digital skill, labour market rigidity and time to start a new business are areas that must be addressed if South Africa to improve its current economic state. Persisting with what is working and rectifying what isn’t is the path to improvement. and given that South Africa currently ranks 67 out of 140 nation on the GCI, there is much room for improvement. Bryden Morton and Chris Blair – executive director and CEO of 21st Century respectively. 