Even though most polls are pointing to a clear ANC victory, it is important to consider alternative outcomes and the potential impact on investors. The ANC has managed to maintain its majority vote with the vote varying between 62% and 69%. Even though there is a lot of speculation on the direction of the vote, specifically with “traditional” ANC voters returning to the voting polls, most polls are indicating the ANC will win the 2019 election with a clear majority i.e. somewhere above 55%, this is the “base case” view. Johan Els, chief economist at Old Mutual Investment Group, reinforces the “base case” view of a clear ANC majority vote, which would be a vote of confidence in Ramaphosa and the intent to; transform the economy, rebuild confidence, grow the economy and fight corruption. This could well indicate the start of a new “goldilocks” phase for the SA economy, specifically if this coincides with lower yet more synchronised global growth. For most of us this is more of a Cinderella tale, the remarkable changing in fortunes that most of us live and hope for; our beloved country. The catalyst or “flags” to look out for in this scenario includes; a clear ANC victory (above 55%); increased investor and business confidence; increased fixed investment spending, associated growth in production, consistent GDP growth, growth in employment and growth in consumer spending – a positive reinforcing virtuous cycle. Better confidence a precondition for stronger growth Source: Old Mutual Investment Group Coronation Fund Managers further believes the way in which government manages the Eskom crisis will give us some insight into government’s broader capacity for reform. This could be one of, if not the most important “flags” to watch out for in the “base case scenario”! Within this scenario, business and investors start believing in, and investing in SA again and the political “shackles of growth” are removed. In an alternative scenario; the ANC votes fall significantly below 55% and Ramaphosa loses credibility. Even though the “margin” and extent of the above is debatable, the symptoms would be; the lack of capacity to deal with the reforms required at Eskom, continued corruption, not implementing market-friendly policies, a lack of foreign investment, business and consumer confidence continuing to slide. This will be manifested through the transmission mechanism: a weakening rand. It is interesting to consider the potential outcome of the two “extreme” scenarios; both Johan Els and Peter Armitage (CEO of Anchor Asset Management) share similar views of how the two “extremes” could potentially play out: The ANC gets 55% plus of the vote: Under this scenario, you would see a strengthening of the rand; this would be supportive of SA shares, specifically shares that are geared to the SA economy. Under this scenario, we could see a recovery in GDP to above the 2% level. This scenario could see a significant strengthening of the rand that could surprise investors. If this scenario coincides with slower but “synchronised” global growth and we see the implementation of the ANC election promises, this could spark the beginning of our “Cinderella scenario”. The ANC and CR lose credibility and we see a significant reduction in the ANC majority: This scenario would be negative for SA “Inc” and will clearly be reflected in the rand as the transmission mechanism. The rand is likely to weaken significantly and the loss of voter and investor confidence would be reflected in the JSE with a weakening in share prices, confidence and GDP. Even though this scenario could cause significant short-term pain, Els does believe that, should this unfold it could be positive for the economy in the long term as it would require help from the IMF, which comes with pre-conditions to structurally reform. Within this context, what should investors do? It is important to consider different scenarios as part of your financial plan, don’t get lost in only focusing on the “doomsayers” or only focusing on the “eternal optimists”. There are a number of leading South African asset managers who have been able to manage client portfolios through difficult market conditions. It is important to have the right combination of asset managers and investment funds that allow some flexibility to adjust to prevailing and anticipated market conditions. Even though a black swan event by its very nature is unpredictable – there are a number of important questions investors can consider to plan for unforeseen events i.e.: Wynand Gouws is a certified financial planner with an advanced postgraduate diploma in investments and estate planning from the University of the Free State. The views and opinions shared in this article belong to their author, cannot be construed as financial advice, and do not necessarily mirror the views and opinions of Moneyweb.