Boeing said it’s helping to investigate how a 737-800 plane arriving from Cuba slipped into a river after skidding off a runway near Jacksonville, Florida. The chartered flight operated by Miami Air International was carrying 136 passengers and seven crew when it left the runway at Naval Air Station Jacksonville on Friday evening, Boeing said in a statement. Authorities said there were no fatalities. The US National Transportation Safety Board said it has sent a “Go Team” of 16 to investigate “Friday’s runway excursion” and expects to hold a media briefing later on Saturday, the agency said on Twitter. The NTSB later said it had recovered the flight data recorder from the plane that “overran the runway at NAS Jacksonville and came to rest” in the St. Johns River in Jacksonville, Florida, according to a tweet. Read: Boeing CEO faces shareholders for first time since 737 MAX crashes The investigations team has “expertise in aircraft operations, structures, powerplants, human performance, weather, airports and other areas,” the NTSB said. Boeing said it’s providing technical assistance at the request and under the direction of the NTSB. While it isn’t clear yet what led to the plane ending up in the river, the incident comes as Boeing remains enmeshed in one of the biggest crises in its century-long history. The plane maker has been on the defensive since its 737 Max planes crashed in Indonesia and Ethiopia, killing 346 people in a span of five months. The 737 Max plane has been grounded as the company tries to convince airlines and regulators it will be safe once a software update is installed. The chartered flight in Friday’s crash arrived from Naval Station Guantanamo Bay, according to Naval Air Station Jacksonville, in a post on its Facebook page. Images show the plane partially submerged in the St Johns River. The Jacksonville Sheriff’s Office said its Marine Unit has been called in to assist the Naval Air Station to retrieve the plane, which was not submerged. Jacksonville Mayor Lenny Curry said soon after the accident that teams were working to control jet fuel in the water. © 2019 Bloomberg L.P