Here’s what caught our attention on Friday: 1.Mr Price results Mr Price CEO Mark Blair says the clothing and homeware retailer delivered solid earnings growth and an increase in dividend in what was “a very tough year for retail”. He however added that Mr Price’s apparel and homeware segments outperformed the market and gained market share on an annual basis, adding that for the first time, retail sales exceeded R20 billion and profit before tax amounted to R4 billion. For the 52 weeks ended March 30 2019, Mr Price reported a 6.2% increase in both headline earnings per share (Heps) and diluted Heps to 1 168.6 cents and 1 142. 3 cents respectively. The company declared a dividend of 736.2 cents, also up 6.2% for the period. 2.Standard Bank takes on climate crisis Standard Bank’s AGM on Thursday was focused on the current climate crisis facing the world. Shareholders voted on two resolutions: the first one requiring the lender to report on its assessment of greenhouse gas emissions resulting from its financing portfolio, as well as its exposure to climate change risk in lending, investing and financing activities; and another on the banks disclosing its coal-financing policies. The former was defeated, with only 38% of shareholders voting in favour, while the latter was passed, with some 55% of shareholders voting for it. According to Moneyweb, this was the first ever climate-change resolution to be tabled in South Africa. Read: Standard Bank shareholders defy board in vote for greener disclosure 3.Absa PMI Absa’s manufacturing purchasing managing index (PMI) for May is expected to be released on Friday. In April, Absa’s PMI went up to 47.2 from 45 in March. The increase in April was reported to be the first after three consecutive months of decline, as business activity and new sales orders increased, while employment, alongside supplier deliveries and inventories declined, data from Trading Economics shows. Update to follow. 4.Economic events South Africa’s private sector credit for April increased by 7.95% from a year earlier, and from 6.1% in March, data from the South African Reserve Bank showed on Friday. Additionally, expansion in M3 money supply also increased to 8.77% in April, faster than a 6.95% rise in March, data shows. South Africa’s balance of trade for the April is yet to be released, but data from Trading Economics shows that in March, trade surplus rose to R5 billion from a downwardly-revised R3.87 billion in February. Update to follow. 5.Rand update The rand’s movements this week came in response to a number of local and global events making headlines. First, in South Africa, President Cyril Ramaphosa announced his new cabinet late on Wednesday night, which he trimmed to 28 to from 36 previously, and retained members in key posts such as finance and public enterprises. The rand responded positively and reversed losses from Tuesday, when deputy minister David Mabuza had been reappointed to his post. On Thursday, traders were also digesting April’s producer price index data, which increased by 6.5%. In the US, initial jobless claims increased in the week ended May 25 and Trump announced a new 5% tariff on all Mexican goods to restrict migrants entering the US. On Friday, the rand was at R14.78 to the dollar at 9:02.