Here’s what caught our attention on Tuesday: 1. Q1 unemployment rises South Africa’s labour force survey shows an increase in unemployment during the first quarter of 2019. According to the report published by Statistics SA, unemployment inched up to 27.6% from 27.1% in the previous quarter. Significant job cuts in the construction sector and financial services sectors contributed majorly to the increase in unemployment. The expanded definition of unemployment, which includes people who have stopped looking for work, rose to 38% in the first quarter from 37.0% in the previous quarter. Read: SA’s jobless rate rises to 27.6%, near 15-year high 2. Nova’s clandestine property auction A Moneyweb probe into the Nova Property Group reveals that the company, which is the rescue vehicle of the failed Sharemax investment scheme, plans to auction off five shopping centres with the value of almost R150 million. The decision was made without informing shareholders. According to Moneyweb, the auction comes after the company released poor annual financial statements last year. Furthermore, Moneyweb states that the auction follows a previous trend, in which Nova sold numerous properties without repaying the property-related debentures, and instead used the money to fund operational expenditure. Read: Nova plans to sell another five properties 3. President is back to work – harder than before Now that the election has been won, victory claimed and the celebrations are over, the president and his party have to work hard to continue gaining the confidence of investors and South Africans alike. President Cyril Ramaphosa so far has a possible cabinet reduction plan on the cards and has also revived an advisory unit which is tasked with counselling the president on policy reforms and implementation, while the Policy and Research Services unit has been asked to assist with technical and research work for the president and the Department of Trade and Industry. Read: Ramaphosa revives advisory unit to drive policy <a href="http://iono.fm/e/687363">Content hosted by iono.fm</a> 4. Investec Property Fund results For the year ended March 31, 2019, the Investec Property Fund reported an increase in headline earnings per share to R199.84 from R106.41 in 2018, while basic and diluted earnings per share amounted to R193.94, up from R172.62 in 2018. The company’s normalised full-year distribution growth increased 5.1% and amounted to 142.23 cents per share. The company’s net asset value increased by 3.9% as a result of the positive performance of offshore investments, while it was able to conclude R3.7 billion of its debt re-finance. A final dividend of 72.50 cents has been declared fort the six months ended March 31, 2019. 5. Currencies move as trade tensions intensify The trade war between the US and China is intensifying after China acted in retaliation against Donald Trump’s tariff hike on Chinese goods last week. On Monday, China ignored warnings from the US and imposed tariffs on $60 billion worth of US imports from June 1. The risk trade-off impacted a number of emerging market currencies. In South Africa, the rand’s gains eased after strengthening for five days as election-inspired currency optimism wears off. On Tuesday, the rand was at R14.33 to the dollar at 06:25 am. Read: Investors brace portfolios for longer US-China trade war Trade tensions hold the rand down