When asked to describe risk, London Business School professor Elroy Dimson said: “Risk means more things can happen than will happen.” Put another way, risk is a reflection of a range of possible outcomes, each with relatively low probability of actually occurring. For the statistically inclined, think of a normal distribution. For those less statistically inclined, let me describe this by using an analogy that many a South African sports fan will relate to. In 2015, the Proteas played in the Cricket World Cup semi-final against New Zealand. Batting first, we scored a respectable 281/5, with Faf du Plessis scoring 82 runs and David Miller blasting a quick-fire 49 off just 18 balls. Dale Steyn had not had the best of days … Fast forward to the end of the New Zealand innings, with only two balls left in the game. The Silver Ferns were standing at 293/6 (the score was adjusted due to rain, using the Duckworth–Lewis method), requiring just five runs for victory. Dale Steyn was bowling to South African born Grant Elliott. Dale had not had the best of days with the ball, but was still (and will be for a long time) one of the best fast bowlers in the world. As Steyn starts his run up to what we now know would be the final ball of the match (hindsight bias, we will touch on this again later), ‘a range of possible outcomes’ could have transpired … Steyn could have bowled a misdirected bouncer over the keeper’s head that could have resulted in four wides that would basically have ended the game. He could have bowled the perfect yorker and ended Elliot’s innings, followed by one more ‘unplayable’ delivery that could have given South Africa a historic victory. On the other hand, a wicket could have fallen followed by a four that would have led to a tied cricket game. Or, or, or … there are an enormous amount of different ways things could have played out. Sadly, only one of the possible outcomes did. We now know that Steyn bowled a less-than-perfect half volley, which Elliot sweetly struck back over his head for a six. ‘Many things could have happened’ Renowned US investor and writer Howard Marks says of risk: “Many things could have happened in each case in the past, and the fact that only one did happen understates the potential for variability that existed.” In investing, there is a plethora of risks. Anything from illiquidity to political risk, from currency to interest rate risk, from implementation to credit risk, the list literally goes on. However, for the majority of people whose money is invested, this means very little. If you define risk, as is widely done, by quoting volatility or standard deviation you are probably talking in a language that not many understand. Sitting in front of a client and professing a standard deviation of x-percentage, I would argue, counts for very little. I would say that for the majority of end users/clients/those whose money is invested, risk is generally defined as either the possibility of a loss of capital and/or the risk of your investment falling short of what is required in order to achieve a certain objective. The two risks in this case being the opposite ends of the same scale. As in the above-mentioned cricket game, someone has to win and someone has to lose. (Sure, a draw is also possible, but this would have led to other outcomes where a winner would eventually have been decided; it is inherently difficult to play a final with three teams.) The one risk few are willing to bear The permanent – or any – loss of capital is a risk that few investors are willing to bear. This is evident through behavioural finance studies performed by Nobel laureate Daniel Kahneman and his collaborator Amos Tversky – in particular, a behavioural bias termed ‘loss aversion’. Loss aversion implies that a loss ‘hurts’ twice as much as an equal gain, leading people to shy away from the risk of losing capital. And who can blame the conservative investor? In a relatively short space of time an investor in Saambou or Steinhoff experienced a permanent loss of capital. Arguably, the latter can still recover and technically no permanent loss of capital has been experienced yet for those who did not sell. But I would not hold my breath. However, as the wise Mr Marks also stated: “We have to consider the risk of not taking enough risk, which leads to the risk of falling short.” Few individuals can afford to save sufficient funds on a monthly basis in a ‘risk free’ investment – it’s debatable whether there is such a thing – in order to one day have enough money to retire, which is generally the most common savings goal, with the same living standard before and in retirement. Few investment professionals would argue against the conclusion that in order to earn a return that increases the purchasing power of capital (especially after fees and taxes), an investor needs to put some capital at risk. That applies even if the perceived risk is low or if the probability of loss is low by historical standards. In summary, to reduce the risk of falling short, you have to increase the risk of losing capital. US financial historian and economist Peter Bernstein wrote: “We like to rely on history to justify our forecasts of the long run, but history tells us over and over again that the unexpected and the unthinkable are the norm, not an anomaly. That is the real lesson of history.” Risk only lies in the future. Remember LTCM? Long-Term Capital Management, the US hedge fund firm that used absolute-return trading strategies combined with high financial leverage … and lost $4.6 billion in less than four months following the Asian and Russian financial crises of the late 1990s. Or the financial crisis of 2008/9? Statisticians described some of the events during this crisis as a ‘6-sigma event’ that should only happen every 796 years. The statisticians’ failure is that they see these types of events in isolation, whereas they might be caused by different factors while having a similar effect on the markets. The moral of the story Firstly, risk should be part of investment planning not only when the outlook (for the market, the economy, the currency or interest rates) is unfavourable; risk should be the centrepiece of every discussion. Each investor with an objective has a unique risk profile. Remember that even though there may be a large range of possible outcomes, one of them will occur. Hedge against the unacceptable, position for the probable. Secondly, talk to your clients about their risk, not your risk as an investment professional. If you do not know your client’s definition of risk, you cannot plan around it. It is not possible to define risk to a number in every conversation. A differentiator of a wealth planner is the ability to qualify risk rather than just quantifying it. Finally, risk is not necessarily ‘bad’ – there is a risk of falling short if you don’t take enough risk. Risk should not only be seen as a negative component of the investment equation. Take client-understood risk so that there will be as few surprises as possible. Recall that 6-sigma event, with the outrageously low probability; it can happen on the upside as well … For statisticians, the one-day surge in the S&P 500 of 11.6% on October 13, 2008, was, according to MarketCalls, an 11.82 sigma event. For the cricket fans, let me take you back to only two months after that famous October 2008 surge. More specifically, to Melbourne, Australia – the first test of the tour. Australia won the toss and batted first, scoring 375. South Africa followed with a less inspiring innings of 281, a deficit of 94 runs. In the second innings, Australia once again scored more than 300 runs to set South Africa a target of 414. This would be the highest ever run chase on Australian soil, and just four runs shy of the world record. A 6+ sigma event, I would assume, as it has only happened once before in history. And, with hindsight bias, we won quite comfortably, with six wickets in fact. Easy, never in doubt? It’s all down to probabilities. Hannes Viljoen is a wealth investments manager in the family office at Absa Wealth.