Nova Property Group, the rescue vehicle of the failed Sharemax investment scheme, has put five shopping centres valued at nearly R150 million up for auction without informing investors about the impending sale of four of the centres. The five properties are set to be auctioned off by Auction Inc on May 30. Details of the auction can be found here. This sees the trend of recent years – in which Nova has sold numerous properties without repaying all the debentures attached to the specific properties – continuing. (The debentures related to Silverwater Crossing and Magalieskruin Shopping Centre were in fact repaid). Details of the properties Nova has now put on auction: Property Disclosure of intent to dispose to investors 2018 valuation Current per annum income as per auction documentation Carletonville Centre Not disclosed R51.8 million R3.4 million Shoprite Secunda Not disclosed R24.7 million R4.2 million Secunda Plaza Not disclosed R17.1 million R2.8 million Carnival Centre Not disclosed R21.3 million R1.4 million Athlone Park Disclosed R32.4 million R3.7 million R147.4 million  The marketing descriptions on the auction page are brief and offer limited information, but suggest that these centres offer excellent turnaround opportunities. Qualified audit and depressed cash flows The proposed disposal of the properties on auction follows the release of dismal annual financial statements (AFS) last year, which highlighted a dire operational cash flow forecast. The AFS were qualified by the group’s auditor, Nexia SAB&T, who not only questioned the valuations of Nova’s properties, but also raised concerns as to whether Nova can continue as a going concern. The AFS also revealed Nova’s dire cash flow position. During the period, the company burned through nearly R24 million of cash and at the end of the period only had R5.7 million cash in the bank. It is therefore evident that Nova will need either debt funding or the proceeds of the disposal of additional properties to cover operational expenses. One of the operational expenses placing a drain on cash flows is the salaries of executive board members. In the previous financial year, the board paid itself nearly R17 million. According to Moneyweb’s calculations, these salaries represent 23% of the total cash the group received from customers – or R1 of every R4 received – in the 2018 financial year, as well as 10.9% of total operating expenses. Read: Nova teetering on the verge of insolvency In another development, Liezl Gildenhuys, a former financial director of the company, alleges in court papers related to an ongoing constructive dismal case before the Labour Court that the proceeds from the sale of properties were used to fund operational expenditure and not to repay debenture holders or upgrade properties. She alleges that Nova disposed of nine properties valued at R242 482 364 and that the proceeds were not repaid to debenture holders. These properties are 148 Leeuwpoort Street, Oxford Gate, Rivonia Square, Nelspruit Hyper, The Fern, Whale Rock, Shopmakers Village, Parkside and Die Meent. Gildenhuys also alleges that she was fired after reporting alleged accounting irregularities to the Nova board, Nexia and the Independent Regulatory Board for Auditors (Irba). Nova denies Gildenhuys’s claims and is defending the case. Read: Former finance director claims Nova ‘misrepresented’ its financial position No response from Nova Moneyweb put detailed questions to Nova CEO Dominique Haese and chairman Connie Myburgh related to the auction, the reason why the properties are to be sold, and whether the proceeds will be used to repay investors, but they did not respond. Nova has previously suspended communication with Moneyweb (see the statement below). Moneyweb approached Auction Inc for more details regarding the impending sale but the company said it could only provide such information following Nova approval. Moneyweb did not receive such information prior to publication. Nova communiqué A particularly interesting development is that Nova did not inform debenture holders of its intention to put the properties up for auction, despite publishing an update on its commercial activities on its website in February. This statement briefly gave updates on the group’s portfolio of assets. Although the update for the Athlone property disclosed its imminent sale, the updates for the other four properties do not. It is also interesting to note that despite the recent sale of several other properties and the raising of more than R230 million, the Nova statement does not refer to any significant capital upgrade or refurbishment taking place at a single shopping centre in the portfolio. Response from debenture holders Roger Johnson, chair of the Nova Debenture Creditors Action Group (NDCAG),expressed his concern regarding the intended disposals and said it would lead to the further erosion of Nova’s asset base. He added that in 2017 and 2018 Nova sold several properties (Checkers Virginia, Benoni Hyper, Silverwater Crossing and properties related to Brookfield Investment) without any prior communication to debenture holders, except for a March 2017 communiqué that informed Silverwater Crossing and Magalieskruin debenture holders that their debentures had been repaid. “Why are some sales proceeds applied to debenture repayment and others not?” he asked. Said Johnston: “The NDCAG suspects that, as with Rivonia Square, the other funds received from a number of these sales have been diverted into the company’s working capital and have been applied to who knows what undeclared purposes and expenditure. Perhaps it is this money that is keeping the company afloat and funding the allegedly excessive remuneration of the directors?” Nova has previously suspended correspondence with Moneyweb. The response below was sent to Moneyweb in November 2016. Dear Mr van Niekerk, It is regrettable that our efforts in engaging Moneyweb openly, constructively and in a bona vide fashion has not been reciprocated. In response Moneyweb has chosen to publish articles without prior reference to us, and in breach of your undertaking to allow us to see and comment on the articles first, which articles twist the facts, articulate a number of inaccuracies and untruths and seek to slander and defame the Nova Group and its directorate. We are considering our position and our rights in this regard are reserved. It has become clear to us that any information that is provided by us to Moneyweb, will be twisted and used out of context for the purpose of further negative reporting of and concerning the Nova Group and its directorate and given that no further productive purpose would be served in engaging with Moneyweb, the Nova Group has decided to break off all forms of communication with Moneyweb. We will accordingly no longer respond to questions Moneyweb pose to us, requests for commentary on proposed articles or for that matter to any articles that Moneyweb might publish, subject of course to a reservation of the right to deal with any matter Moneyweb might publish, in a court of law. Please ensure, should you elect to publish anything further regarding the Nova Group and any of its functionaries, that you include in such publication our above position, verbatim. Yours faithfully, Dominique Haese CEO Nova Property Group