Over the last year, in the run up to the May 8 general election, I have been asked regularly what I think about the future of South Africa. Of course, this question is heavily loaded, since most people are probably less interested in my views on the actual political outcomes per se, and rather more worried about the impact the election results may have on their money. Most investors have experienced pedestrian returns from their retirement portfolios over the last five years and many think this erosion of their nest egg, in real terms, is going to continue into perpetuity. For the record, I do not adhere to this line of thinking. Seen in the context of nearly a decade of severe ANC misrule, rampant corruption and a deteriorating economic performance by South Africa Inc, this is an important question to consider. Research suggests that people across the South African social demographic spectrum are generally more fearful and less optimistic about the future. Moreover, by all accounts the current wave of emigration washing over South Africa is huge.  According to migration specialists, young, qualified professionals and skilled artisans are mobile and leaving our shores to deploy their skills in foreign economies in record numbers. Some high-profile investment advisors have even been writing doomsday articles in the mainstream media suggesting that South Africans should liquidate their lifesavings and take all their money offshore, while they still have a chance to do so. The domestic backdrop creates the perfect environment for this type of misguided message (in my opinion) to take root and flourish. To be honest, I have no clue what the actual election outcome is going to be – nobody does. However, as do most people, I have an opinion. The point is that my perspective and perception on the future (not just the upcoming election results) is not fact but opinion. An opinion heavily influenced by many factors including; one’s age, gender, race, education, employment status, religion, interests, financial position, personality type and many other softer influences. These influences also morph over time and may cause a change or drift in one’s perception of the world surrounding them. All these factors lead to the study of the so-called behavioural sciences as market researchers and society influencers try to grasp what makes people “tick” and behave in a certain manner. Investing is no different and individual results can be heavily impacted by behavioural factors. In a recent blog penned by Peter Gross of the CFA Institute he opined, “Behavioral (sic) finance rests on a simple premise: The biggest risks in investing are embedded in ourselves as decision makers. Biology encourages our brains to take cognitive shortcuts that can cause big problems.” After 24 years of observing my own and my clients’ investment decision making, I would agree with this statement. Behavioural elements have a large impact on decision-making. After periods of good returns investors feel smart and enthused. Confidence about the future edges higher, risks are systematically underestimated, and overconfidence gradually creeps into the decision-making process. The future begins to look rosier than it will ultimately prove to be in time. Investors seldom change their investment manager or strategy under these conditions. Conversely, after periods of poor returns, investors are often more sombre and loss-aversion behaviour kicks in. Their confidence is shattered, and pessimism clouds their decision-making process. They simply cannot endure the emotional pain of experiencing further losses for a sustained period of time, even though short-term losses are as much a part of long-term investing as the gains are. Investors almost always want to change their investment manager and/or de-risk their investment strategy when they have experienced losses and perceive times are bad and deteriorating. If one accepts that the vast majority of people reading this article will live, work, retire and die in South Africa, a more scientific and less emotional assessment of the investment future is required. If this does not apply to you, then your retirement assets should be predominantly exposed to the assets on offer in the country that you intend to retire in and incur the bulk of your expenditure in. The following pointers are most important for investors to consider to help protect them from their own poor behavioural decisions: Paul Stewart is Chief Executive Officer of Bridge Fund Managers. The views and opinions shared in this article belong to their author, cannot be construed as financial advice, and do not necessarily mirror the views and opinions of Moneyweb.