Here’s what caught our attention on Thursday: 1. Elections 2019 – now for the counting South Africa’s sixth national elections, which took place on Wednesday, reportedly went off smoothly for the most part, although some stations faced fury for opening later. Because of this, voters were allowed extra time to cast their votes. Now the laborious task of counting ballots begins. Analysts are betting on an ANC win, based on polls. EWN is reporting that the ANC is already taking an early lead at just over 50% nationally, followed by the DA at 28% and EFF at 7%. The final result is due on Saturday, May 11. Until then, we wait. Read: Ramaphosa moment of truth as vote count starts 2. Steinhoff needs time and patience to rebuild After a long wait embattled retailer Steinhoff released its restated 2017 financial results late on Tuesday evening. The results followed an investigation into the firm by PwC after accounting irregularities emerged in late 2017. The company has reported a $4 billion operating loss in its restated results. According to Moneyweb, the restated figures exclude the abnormal transactions between group parties, which were previously fabricated to effectively inflate earnings. The company says the irregularities involved a number of parties within and outside of Steinhoff, but added that much effort has gone into restructuring the company’s debt, after receiving support from bondholders and long-term creditors. Read: Steinhoff gives investors hope but they will need even more patience 3. Gold and mining production data South Africa’s mining production figures for March are expected to be released on Thursday. In February, mining production slumped 7.5% year-on-year, following a 3.3% decline in January, and beating market expectations of a 3.5% fall. Gold production has been dwindling, falling to 20.6% in February from 22.8% in January. Output for all platinum group metals also slowed to 17.8% in February from 28.1% in January. Update to follow. 4. March manufacturing output South Africa’s manufacturing output for March is also expected to be released on Thursday. In February, manufacturing output rose 0.6%, following an upwardly revised 0.9% increase in January, data from Trading Economics shows. Output slowed for food and beverage, textiles clothing and footwear, communication equipment and machinery, among others, and rose for petroleum, chemical products, rubber and plastic products. Update to follow. 5. Net1 sells unit to RMB Payment services firm, Net1 has opted to enter into a transaction with FirstRand Bank, to further reduce its shareholding DNL-4PL Contracts from 38% to 30.4% for a transaction consideration of R215 million. Net1’s CEO, Herman Kotze says in a Sens statement that the transaction will allow the company to deleverage its balance sheet, free up its cash reserves and commit to its core fintech and business markets. Net1 is to use the proceeds of the sale plus an additional R15 million of its cash reserves to early-settle its outstanding long-term borrowings of R230 million.