The rising cost of living is hitting South African consumers hard, many people are having a tough time figuring out how to make the leading ladies in their lives feel special on a budget. The good news is that there are so many great ways to celebrate Mother’s Day without breaking the bank. Try these practical tips for a fun, affordable Mother’s Day: 1. Love starts at home – ditch the restaurant frenzy and opt instead for a meal at home. Dust off those candles, make your mom’s favourite meal, play some music that she likes and your night is set. You could enjoy a delicious three course meal at home for a third of the price of a restaurant and without the hassle of finding parking, dealing with frazzled waiters and putting up with overcrowded restaurants. 2. Go out for dessert – just because you can’t go out for an expensive three or five course meal, doesn’t mean you can’t go out at all. Have a nice dinner at home and head out to your favourite coffee shop or café for a sweet end to your meal. 3. Skip the knick knacks – what will your mom do with that ornament, mug or oversized, overpriced, wall-mounted heart? These things end up becoming unnecessary clutter anyway, so rather save that money for a good bottle of wine or delicious dessert for your stay-at-home dinner. 4. Movie night – no dressing up, no paying for parking and no dealing with crowds. Make some popcorn and treat Mom to her favourite flick! 5. Brekkie in bed – nothing beats this classic, cost-effective favourite. Add a twist like a photo album with all your favourite pics of / with your mom, a jar with messages about each of the many reasons that you love her etc. 6. Get creative with DIY coupons – create your own coupons for neck massages, a bubble bath by candlelight or a night off. There are plenty of practical things that will help to make your mom’s life easier like washing dishes for her, doing her shopping or helping her to do things that she’s been putting off for a while. The gift of time is invaluable. 7. Get your siblings in on the act – with busy lives keeping many families apart, moms like few things more than having their children under one roof and spending time with them. If everyone brings a snack and something to drink, you’re all set for a wonderful, budget-friendly time. If the weather allows, a family picnic is also a great idea. 8. Avoid the floral fancy – a dozen red roses will set you back about R400 while you can get a bouquet of sunflowers for about half that, so avoid the rose cliché and explore the many other floral options on offer. You can even make a bouquet yourself. 9. Create a card – Mother’s Day cards can be expensive. Using relatively inexpensive materials from a craft shop, you can easily create a personalised card that will no doubt mean a lot more. 10. Give the gift of undivided attention – this one is absolutely free! Did you know that, according to a study conducted by British psychologists, the average young adult spends up to a third of their waking hours on their phones – so by simply putting your smartphone down for a few hours, you’re showing your mom just how much you love her! Whether it’s your mom, your gran, your mom-in-law, your step mom, your ‘like a mother to me’-mom or a mom who would otherwise be alone on Mother’s Day, these ladies deserve our best to make them feel as loved as they are. This isn’t measured in money, but in special moments shared. Susan Steward, marketing manager of Budget Insurance.