Here’s what caught our attention on Thursday: 1. Maimane throws in the towel DA leader Mmusi Maimane and DA Federal Council chairperson Athol Trollip have resigned from the main opposition party. The resignations were announced on Wednesday and come just days after the resignation of Joburg Mayor Herman Mashaba. According to Reuters, Maimane said the journey to transform the party was marred by “consistent and coordinated attempt to undermine [his] leadership and ensure that either this project failed, or [he] failed,” he said in his address to the media. Read: DA leader Mmusi Maimane resigns 2. Clicks results Clicks is reporting a 16.8% increase in diluted headline earnings per share to 672 cents and an increase in headline earnings per share of 12.2% to 684 cents. The group’s turnover increased by 7.2% to R31.4 billion, total income grew by 9.7% to R8.7 billion and operating profit increased by 14.2% to R2.3 billion for the year ended August 31, 2019. Clicks’s health and beauty sales increased by 10.5% and the company says it gained market share across all of its core categories during the period. A total dividend of 445 cents per share is being declared, up 17.1%. 3. Altron results Technology solutions company Altron is reporting a 4% increase in headline earnings per share from continuing operations to 73 cents, while basic earnings per share increased 4% to 76 cents for the six months ended August 31, 2019. Revenue from continuing operations is up 8% to R8.53 billion and an interim dividend per share of 29 cents is being declared. The company says it secured key wins during the year, which included the partnership agreement entered into between Toyota, Vodacom and Netstar, among others. 4. Stenham Group to sell shares Stenham Group, which is a wholly owned subsidiary of Peregrine, has agreed in principle to sell 50% of its shareholding in Stenham Asset Management to management, with effect from April 1, 2019. The announcement was issued on Sens on Thursday. The transaction would value Stenham Asset Management at GBP16 million. According to the statement, the transaction is being implemented to ensure the continuity, sustainability and long-term growth of the Stenham Asset Management business. 5. RAF is insolvent The Road Accident Fund (RAF) is struggling to stay afloat. The fund, which was set up to pay compensation to victims of road accidents, is dependent on fuel levies to meet its ever-increasing liabilities, and with an accumulated deficit R262.2 billion in 2019, the RAF is deep in the red. The Auditor-General (AG) notes that the accumulated deficit of R262.2 billion, together with the excess of liabilities over assets of R262.1 billion, indicates that there is a material uncertainty relating to whether the RAF is a going concern. Read more on the RAF’s troubles here.