Boris Johnson is battling to sell his new Brexit deal to skeptical members of the UK parliament ahead of a crucial vote on Saturday. The UK prime minister has no majority in the House of Commons but he needs to convince his own Conservatives, as well as opposition politicians to back the divorce accord he struck with the EU on Thursday. If he fails, the country will be on course to leave the bloc without a deal on October 31, or to delay exit day for a third time. Read: Brexit: EU says UK team agreed to draft deal “This is our chance in the UK as democrats to get Brexit done,” Johnson told a press conference in Brussels on Thursday. “People want to move this thing on, it’s been going on for a long time.” He wouldn’t be drawn on what he would he do if he loses the vote. Defeat could unleash a political crisis unparalleled in modern times: despite EU leaders leaving open the possibility they could allow Britain more time to leave, Johnson has steadfastly refused to delay Brexit beyond October 31. With any attempt to leave without a deal likely to face legal challenge, he may have to allow his plans to be put to voters in a general election, or even a second referendum. If he is to win Saturday’s vote, Johnson needs to secure the support of Northern Ireland’s Democratic Unionist Party, which has categorically opposed the agreement he reached with the European Union on Wednesday. He is also seeking to woo reluctant members of his own side, and persuade opposition Labour politicians to back him, if he is to prevail. The parliamentary arithmetic is very tight, all the more so since the DUP said it is unable to support the accord. The loyalist party is opposed to Northern Ireland being treated any differently to the rest of the UK Under Johnson’s plans, the region would still be subject to some of the EU’s single market rules to mitigate the need for customs checks on the border with Ireland. That would, in effect, put a customs border in the Irish Sea. Johnson needs to pick up roughly 61 votes from a pool of about 75 Members of parliament who might be persuaded to join him — that will involve persuading hold-outs in his own party to come over to his side regardless of what the 10 DUP lawmakers decide. There are signs that some Tories who voted down his predecessor Theresa May’s deal — among them Steve Baker, leader of the self-described “Spartan” group of hard-core Brexiters — are falling into line. Johnson, too, is trying to win the support of a significant minority of MPs from the opposition Labour Party who believe the 2016 referendum result must be honored. To woo them, he is preparing to a package of measures, including protections for workers’ rights and environmental standards after Brexit. Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn called for a second referendum, saying in Brussels that Johnson’s deal — which he described as a “sell-out” — was worse than that put forward by May. Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, said her Scottish Nationalist Party will vote against the deal as well, complaining that it creates too great a separation from the EU. As attention swung toward the vote at Westminster, European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker offered support to Johnson. “If we have a deal, we have a deal and there is no need for prolongation — that’s not only the British view, that’s my view too,” Juncker said. “He and myself we don’t think that it’s possible to give another prolongation.” Even if the decision over whether to grant an extension may not be his, by playing down the chances of another extension, Juncker is framing the vote in the House of Commons as a straight choice between Johnson’s deal or no deal — just as the British leader has tried to do himself. That increases the pressure on undecided lawmakers in Westminster to back the government — but it also raises the cost of failure dramatically. © 2019 Bloomberg L.P.