Transnet is relying on debt to operate, it requires more capital to fund expansion, and it is still labouring under the harmful effects of state capture. However, there is much it should do to put its house in order. In 2018 Transnet was given a qualified external audit opinion, and I wrote: “Transnet is limping along with inadequate internal control systems, scanty record-keeping, and no proper procurement systems. Nor does it have appropriate risk management activities to prevent irregular expenditure or properly monitor supply chain management.” Read: Transnet could be derailed by audit report, reportable irregularities A year later, auditors SizweNtsalubaGobodo Grant Thornton, again qualifying their opinion, opined on various inadequacies, including irregular expenditure of R41.5 billion, fruitless and wasteful expenditure of R507 million, inadequate oversight responsibility regarding compliance with applicable legislation, that proper record-keeping was not timeously implemented, and that the accounting authority did not always provide effective leadership based on good governance. Did Transnet acting group CEO Mohammed Mahomedy, Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan, officials from his department, as well as National Treasury try to strong-arm the auditors to change their qualified 2019 audit opinion? Read: Transnet disputes qualified audit finding If so, why did they not amend the directors’ report, which states on page 21 of the annual report: “This matter has been considered in detail and, with input provided by various technical and legal experts, the Company now accepts that the affected expenditure should be reported as irregular.” To add weight to the contention that there are possible procurement irregularities, the auditors note: “During the financial year under review the regulatory authorities and the accounting authority conducted investigations into alleged irregularities, fraud and corruption within the procurement environment and other areas of the Group”. Further, Mahomedy referred to the impact of state capture in his ‘operating context’ report, and disclosed that Transnet was manipulated to benefit a small group of individuals through procurement contracts and conspiring with local consulting firms to identify business opportunities. The more serious issue is that the qualified audit opinion could put certain loans and facilities available to the group at risk. However, management is of the opinion that the qualified opinion is “technical in nature, (Public Finance Management Act (PFMA)-specific), and not related to compliance with International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) nor the Companies Act of South Africa”. Key risks Transnet is facing diverse risks, such as, weather (two severe flood events were experienced in two years, amounting to insurance claims of R443 million), skills shortage, increasing labour activism, and high dependence on the contracting mining sector. There were also a number of security incidents and theft which included cable theft, derailments, and community unrest. The export coal line suffered the brunt of the incidents. In total, there were 65 running line derailments, and 153 shunting derailments. Financial results Transnet slumped to total comprehensive loss of R12 billion (2018: R12.2 billion profit). The reason for the loss is that property, plant and equipment was devalued by R25.9 billion. The major components of this write-down were a write-down of port facilities (R3.6 billion) and rail infrastructure (R23.2 billion). No detailed explanation is given for this. The valuation was based on a discounted cash flow model, taking into account freight tariffs. Either tariffs are down, or the demand for rail freight transport has slumped. Or, could this be the impact of infrastructure theft and sabotage? Profit for the year was R6.0 billion (2018: R4.9 billion), and finance costs increased to R11.6 billion (2018: R10.2 billion). Total cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year amounted to R4.2 billion (2018: R4.4 billion). R10.4 borrowings were repaid (2018: R13.4 billion), and further borrowings were raised of R8.4 billion (2018: R13.3 billion). Transnet does not have sufficient cash flow to fund repayment of debt, without raising further funds. Borrowings Transnet’s total borrowings amounted to R127.6 billion (2018: R122.6 billion) – an increase of R5 billion compared with the prior year, primarily due to foreign exchange rate movements. Exposure to foreign exchange movements is fully hedged, hence the increase in the value of borrowings was matched by a corresponding increase in net derivative financial assets. The gearing ratio is 44.5%. Less than 3% (R3.5 billion) of Transnet debt is supported by government guarantees. Transnet expects to invest a further R153.5 billion over the next five years. If this is raised in debt, the group could have difficulty in covering the finance costs. Standard & Poor’s (S&P) has given Transnet a foreign currency rating of BB/stable outlook (Moody’s Baa3/stable outlook) and a local currency rating of BB+/stable outlook (Moody’s Baa3/P-3/stable outlook). Obviously this will be similarly impacted if South Africa is downgraded. Transnet’s problems cannot be buried Despite murmurings of the PFMA being too strictly enforced by external auditors and that the section on irregular expenditure may be amended, it is obvious that all is not yet well with Transnet. It has been cooperating with the Zondo Commission, the Special Investigating Unit and the Directorate of Priority Crimes Investigations to support their ongoing investigation processes. Disentangling the group from state capture will take time. Attempting to bury these problems will not resolve them, and if these problems are not resolved, they may well receive a qualified audit opinion in 2020.