Here’s what caught our attention on Tuesday: 1. Transnet results State-owned rail and freight agency, Transnet is reporting a 1.6% increase in revenue to R74.1 billion for the full year to March, results released on Monday show. The group’s after-tax profit amounted to R6 billion, up 24.7% while operating expenditure declined 0.1%. Transnet’s acting group CEO Mohammed Mahomedy says Transnet delivered ‘strong operational performance’ despite tough conditions affecting freight volumes in the local economy. Transnet also announced it is due to appoint a permanent CEO by the end of the year. Read: Transnet disputes qualified audit finding 2. CompCom releases private healthcare inquiry findings The inquiry into South Africa’s private healthcare market has found that the industry cannot continue operating in its current form. The investigation, which has taken five years to complete, has found that the private healthcare market in SA is uncompetitive and is failing consumers. The Competition Commission notes that medical aid members are paying more for less value and fewer services. Read: Private healthcare market is ‘failing consumers’ – CompCom 3. Court rules in Net1/ Sassa matter The Supreme Court of Appeals has dismissed Net1 CPS ’s application in the case relating to recovering legal costs from Sassa. According to Net1’s Sens announcement, CPS filed an application for the court to grant it leave to appeal in the March 2018 High Court order, which set aside the agreement between CPS and Sassa and the payment of R317 million. The court ordered CPS to refund the amount with interest. Net1’s CEO Herman Kotze says he is disappointed with the ruling and will study the judgment to determine the next step. 4. Absa PMI In August, Absa PMI fell to 45.7 from 52.1 in July. The August reading was the lowest reading since May 2019, data shows. The decline comes as all of the five major sub-indexes fell back into contraction territory, namely business activity and new orders. Absa adds that domestic demand also weighed on orders. South Africa’s new vehicle sales data for September is expected to be released on Tuesday. 5. Steinhoff considers new auditor Steinhoff is considering the appointment of Mazars Accountants as the retailer’s statutory audit firm for the financial year ending September 30, 2019. The company published an announcement on Tuesday, notifying shareholders that a general meeting will be held to discuss the above proposal.