The Independent Communications Authority of South Africa (Icasa) is responsible for regulating the telecommunications, broadcasting and postal industries.  It is also required to ensure wide coverage of sporting events in the “public interest”, and that views are fair and diverse and broadly representative of South African society. The various regulations to monitor and control telecommunications and broadcasting had been in place for some time and appeared to be working. Or, at least, broadcasters could manage their way around the regulations without being brought to a halt by a roadblock. However, in December 2018, Icasa issued radically new draft regulations. It had not identified any problem, nor had any international benchmarking been undertaken based on measurable indicators. Icasa blindly dumped these radical regulations on the unsuspecting industry with no regard for any possible consequences. It has since received voluminous submissions, and it is highly unlikely that Icasa has the capacity to properly deal with these. Nor is there any published response report on its website. The draft regulations follow the same vein as the Independent Communications Authority (ICA) and the Electronic Communications Act (ECA) in using vague and indeterminate descriptions, impossible to define and measure; including “public interest”, “fairness and diversity”, and “views broadly representing South African society”. “Public interest” pops up all over, but what exactly constitutes public interest? And how does one ascertain whether the public interest is being served or not? Can Icasa reveal any evidentiary-based research that indicates that the “public interest” was not being served? Icasa has not provided any meaningful definitions for its vague references; for example: * Problem statement 101 Icasa fails miserably in solving problems: Did Icasa fall into the trap of producing new regulations to satisfy a vague mandate? One can imagine the scenario, a very important person (VIP) insists that the poor have an inalienable right to watch the sport of their choice, at full live coverage. Skipping over any discussion, the VIP insists on “give me the solution, not the problem”. There are further nonsensical rulings: In the words of Mr Bumble in Oliver Twist by Charles Dickens: “If the law supposes that,” he said, squeezing his hat emphatically in both hands, “the law is an ass.” Hackneyed solutions result in a myriad of problems Leon Louw, executive director of the Free Market Foundation, at a recent media presentation and discussion on ‘the Rugby World Cup and sports broadcasting rights in SA’ in Rosebank, said “The market is unpredictable. It is the threat of a competitor that makes it free.” MultiChoice, in its submission to Icasa, noted that (paraphrased): there are no winners here. The viability of both subscription and free-to-air broadcasters would be negatively impacted. The draft regulations are likely to result in less, not more, sport being broadcast. Icasa has issued some 113 final regulations, and runs the imminent risk of strangulation by regulation.