The Public Investment Corporation (PIC) has confirmed that one of its officials that were involved in the controversial R4.3 billion Ayo Technology deal has been dismissed. Victor Seanie, an Assistant Portfolio Manager for listed equities was dismissed, following the conclusion of his disciplinary hearing. The public came to learn of his involvement when he was suspended shortly after the PIC Commission of Inquiry began its work in January. The commission was looking into matters of impropriety at the asset manager. The basis of his suspension was a preliminary report by the PIC’s internal audit division, which found him and the Head of Listed Investments, Fidelis Madavo, guilty of an “a blatant flouting of governance and approval processes of the PIC”. Read: ‘Dr Dan didn’t lead, he ruled over the PIC’ Responding to questions sent by Moneyweb, PIC head of Corporate Affairs Deon Botha said following a disciplinary process chaired by an independent chairperson, Seanie was found guilty of the charges against him, which included breaching the PIC’s internal policies in investment decisions. “Mr Seanie is one of several senior investment professionals who went through, or are undergoing, internal disciplinary proceedings at this stage,” said Botha. “The PIC board is fully apprised of disciplinary proceedings against several implicated PIC officials and, like the PIC Commission of Inquiry, concurs with the view that these should proceed,” he added. Seanie appeared before the commission on 30 January, nine days after his suspension. His testimony blew the lid on the roles of senior individuals in the PIC in fast-tracking the investment into Ayo and ignoring transaction processes. Small player Seanie told the commission that he was being used as a “scapegoat”  due to him being a “very small player in the bigger scheme of things at the PIC and in respect of the Ayo transaction”. Some of the main players in the Ayo deal included former CEO Dan Matjila, suspended chief financial officer Matshepo More and Madavo. Seanie explained that while he was responsible for compiling equity reports which include the background information, analysis, a conclusion and recommendation on the investment, he did not have a final say on those reports. READ: Suspended PIC CFO says involvement in Ayo deal ‘exaggerated’ The PIC invested R4.3-billion for a 29% stake in the company linked to Independent Media owner Iqbal Survé when Ayo initially listed on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange in December 2017. This was despite views that the company had been overvalued. One of the people who noted the premium on Ayo was Seanie, he said that he had been vocal about Ayo not being a sound investment but was ignored, specifically by Matjila who appeared to have a close relationship with Survé. He said the investment process in Ayo had been unusual, with the company dictating timeframes to the PIC which were “unreasonable” and 70% shorter than usual. Feeling under “extreme pressure” to ensure that the timelines were met, Seanie initiated the process of due diligence on Ayo without the deal being approved by the requisite portfolio monitoring committee. Ayo priced at a premium On top of that Ayo executives were not interested in the PIC’s attempts to negotiate the deal. “The PIC listed equities team was never engaged to negotiate and [initial public offerin] price for Ayo,” said Seanie. READ: Iqbal Survé instrumental in setting Ayo’s R14.7bn valuation. “Ayo approached us with a fixed R43 per share which we were not allowed to negotiate. When we questioned the R43 valuation, we were told that the R43 cannot be changed,” he added So pressed for time was the PIC that Matjila unilaterally signed the irrevocable subscription agreement before any due diligence was completed and the investment being authorised by the PIC, which Seanie said was “highly irregular” because he had never seen that being done before. Seanie said when the deal team raised these concerns Matjila “overruled” them saying “I will use my authority as CEO to sign the Ayo Subscription Agreement and have the decision ratified at the next PMC meeting”. When Matjila appeared before the commission he explained that he had made the decision to sign the irrevocable subscription agreement after making phone calls to the heads of the relevant departments to confirm if the work they had done at that stage recommended the conclusion of an investment in Ayo. He said none of them contested.  Culture of fear Initially, when compiling the final equity report,  Seanie said he had expressed a negative view of the investment and highlighted the many and significant risks of Ayo and the fact that “managements assumptions underpinning the Ayo evaluation were very optimistic”. However, he was told to change this to a “favourable view” by his superiors who reviewed the report because the subscription agreement had already been signed. The PIC is currently engaged in a court process to recoup its money on the basis that Ayo made material misrepresentations about the prospects of the company. Today the company’s share price has dropped dramatically to R5.60 per share. “In my experience, sound investment recommendations by investment professionals are often ignored at PIC,” Seanie told the commission. “I learnt that the PIC’s work culture is also one of intimidation, you don’t question you comply. [There’s] ostracism, fear, coercion and undermining the independent research views of investment professionals,” he added.