Here’s what caught our attention on Wednesday: 1. Nova sidesteps disclosure obligations Moneyweb’s investigation of the Nova Property Group continues with the latest revelation that the board failed to inform shareholders of the resignation of trustee Derek Cohen from the Nova Debenture Trust. According to Moneyweb, Nova claims that the resignation of Cohen was unlawful and the board was therefore not obligated to inform shareholders. In its investigation, Moneyweb argues that Cohen’s resignation should have triggered a process of appointing a replacement. The Nova board also did not convene a meeting to allow investors to elect a new trustee, as explicitly prescribed by the trust deed of the Nova Debenture Trust­­­. Read: Nova board sidesteps disclosure obligations 2. Load shedding is back Eskom has been forced to implement stage 2 load shedding on Wednesday morning. The utility says it needs to cut up to 2 000 megawatts from the national grid between  09:00 and 23:00 due to a shortage of generating capacity. The rand weakened in response. Read: Eskom announces load shedding 3. Ayo Technologies denies transferring funds offshore Ayo Technology Solutions has denied parliamentary claims that it is transferring funds offshore. The company issued an announcement on Sens on Wednesday saying the claims made by the PIC’s acting executive head of legal, governance and compliance, Lindiwe Dlamini, are without merit. Ayo says it has not made an application to the Reserve Bank to transfer funds offshore and that it does not intend to. 4. Retail sales figures South Africa’s retail sales figures for August are expected to be released on Wednesday, in July retail sales increased 2% year on year, easing from a 2.4% rise in June. Sales increased at a slower pace for food, beverages and tobacco, textiles, clothing, footwear and leather goods, among others. Sales slowed for hardware, paint and glass. Update to follow. 5. State capture commission to hear evidence on Vrede Dairy Farm The inquiry into state capture will on Wednesday hear evidence from former MEC of Finance in the Free State, Elizabeth Cornelia Rockman. Rockman is expected to give evidence on matters relating to the Vrede Dairy farm. The initiative was aimed at benefitting emerging farmers but was allegedly instead used as a vehicle to redirect millions of rands to other companies, including those owned by the Gutpa family.