There are 7.1 million young employed South Africans, many of whom can’t make any headway when it comes to saving or paying off debt. Nedbank has created a money management programme to help guide them. Launched on Wednesday, it offers clients three key incentives: loyalty rewards, partner benefits and support for worthy causes. The Greenbacks programme is designed to assist and motivate users to make better money choices that revolve around the core financial challenges they face. Nedbank Greenbacks senior manager Sarah Koopman says the programme will be beneficial in assisting millennials with their monthly budgeting and saving needs. “The thing about millennials is they don’t want to be told what to do,” she says. “The Nedbank rewards programme speaks to that – it is tailored to their specific needs and speaks to their specific behaviours. The programme [promotes saving habits] rather than just saying we will help them save.” Nedbank Greenbacks’ Sarah Koopman. Image: Moneyweb She says while budgeting is the ideal place to start when it comes to managing finances, the quest for a healthy financial lifestyle doesn’t end there. The Old Mutual Millennial Survey for 2018 revealed that 64% of young people in South Africa have a personal loan, with 35% of their income spent servicing the interest on the debt. Koopman says the programme is beneficial for those who do not want to default on their payments and also rewards users financially for being loyal at the end of the payment. “The programme provides clients with a holistic view of how to better handle their finances,” she says. “It assists in understanding that debt is not bad for you, but [that] managing your debt in a specific way can actually be for your benefit in the future.” One of the outcomes of this is that it will ensure that the client has a good credit score. You are not alone It is estimated that South Africans are collectively indebted to the tune of nearly R1 trillion, according to the World Bank. We are also among the top borrowers in the world. Another study released in June shows that middle-income South Africans rely heavily on debt, with some using as much as a quarter of their monthly income to pay interest on debt. Shockingly, more than half of South Africans spend their salary in five days or less after receiving it. “The number of bank accounts is increasing, but fewer people are carrying money over from one month to the next,” a FinScope SA 2018 Fact Sheet states. This makes it difficult for anyone to save and pay off debt. Nedbank Retail and Business chief client officer Anton de Wet says the programme aims to help consumers in this regard. “Many people find it difficult to manage money. Few have a clear idea of the future impact on their lives of money choices made today. We believe our new Greenbacks money management programme will make it easier for people to make better money choices,” he says. Nedbank Retail and Business’s Anton de Wet. Image: Moneyweb The science behind the programme The money management programme is built on behavioural science and is focused on key client behavioural outcomes. The study took two years to complete. The programme is a behaviour-change tool that is made up of groups of easy-to-do money choices geared towards a better financial future for the client. It enables users to earn points every time they swipe their card. They also receive ongoing guidance on how to manage their money, and points for products (accounts) they use. Win-win … De Wet says poverty and inequality were the driving forces behind this money management programme. It does, however, reward users for making greater use of the bank’s products. “Previous [efforts] to get people to work better with their money have not worked well – things like financial literacy programmes and trying to work with a budget,” says De Wet. He adds that research has shown that very few people have taken the necessary steps to make such knowledge work for them. However, when consumers are rewarded for making the right financial decisions, “your brain automatically encourages you to do it again” – and that’s how these incentives encourage users to adopt new behavioural techniques. The programme has been designed to meet four core financial needs: transacting, saving, borrowing and insuring. There is also a responsible borrower package that allows clients to win back their loans, exclusive partner deals and support for a Nedbank affinity programme of the user’s choice.