‘Business must be run at a profit or it will die’ – Henry Ford. If the South African private sector was a single company, it made a profit of about R610 billion over the last year. While R610 billion sounds like a lot of money, the question is what does the number mean for companies or even the economy? Measuring profits is not an exact science but there are a few good ways to measure and compare them. The most important consideration for a private company that needs investors would be (a) what to offer the investor, and (b) how to compare it. There are two primary ways to measure and compare returns across companies: Both are measured as a percentage since in currency any number on its own means very little. For countries, which do not have a share price, the best way to measure the return is as a percentage profit on the assets employed. In South Africa we have a financial statement for the corporate sector and this is very useful in figuring out how the country as a business is doing, as it contains some information about the value of assets that are used to create the profit. Fixed investment returns  In SA the number of assets employed to make that profit (excluding goodwill) is estimated at over R10.9 trillion. So when the non-financial private sector made R610 billion in profit on sales of R9.8 trillion, in simple terms SA Inc made 61 cents profit for every R10.90 it spent on assets such as buildings, trucks and machines. So the actual return for South Africa Inc was less than 6%. In contrast, if the company had invested all the money in a bank account instead of machines, stock and investments elsewhere – it would have received around 7%. Yes folks, taking a risk means you got less out than if you had you kept the money in the bank. That is not good. It results in companies saving their cash in the bank until a project that is likely to beat that guaranteed return comes along. SA Inc is not dying or jumping off a cliff, but the profit is probably not enough to compensate for risks such as inflation, risk of bankruptcy and so on. More importantly, the numbers show that companies can earn more elsewhere. So SA Inc will not invest more locally, which would create work until the returns are better and will compensate for risks, or the risks decline. SA ‘not rotten’ So while SA Inc is not a rotten company like a Steinhoff, it is a laggard compared with other companies or countries. Investment flows reflect this. Both foreign direct investment and local investment remain low, other than where returns are better (often via subsidies). South African companies keep about as much money in the bank as they borrow from the bank – the exceptions being state-owned enterprises (SOEs), which have jumbo-sized bank loans (many rotten as the returns are not there to repay the loans without government help). SA Inc has borrowed the equivalent of only about 20% of GDP from banks, but it has 19% of GDP in bank accounts, waiting for more profitable opportunities to come along. The net effect is that South Africa has a private sector that has taken on minimal risk – if any. As a comparison, the non-financial corporate sector of emerging markets has about 90% borrowed as a percentage of GDP on average, while cash in the bank is about 12-15% of GDP (remember, companies do have to keep some money in a bank for cash flow reasons). Yes, the equivalent of 19% of SA GDP is earning interest at banks, as money in the real economy is not getting the returns it needs. So companies are making very rational decisions: they can see that the risk-return ratio is not high and therefore keep looking for opportunities elsewhere – including in the bank. They also do not borrow too much, as they feel the risks are very high for the rewards they get. Non-financial sector bank deposits as % of GDP  Moreover, as business confidence remains low due to higher risks – such as expropriation of assets, uncertainty about power supply, government policy and indecision – firms are unlikely to reduce cash balances in banks, never mind adopt a more aggressive expansion in the form of loans for new assets for development. For one, returns are below the borrowing rate and the uncertainty adds to the risks, meaning that rewards have to be spectacular. Secondly, business is not sure which way government policy is going to go. Indecision murders economies by subtracting investment, scaring talent, squeezing profits and killing employment. Another council or committee isn’t going to do it. Business confidence and trust in government SA Inc has been loyal and has not only rushed to put money elsewhere, it has kept money here. But it needs sensible economic policies, and for them to be implemented. If politicians have the will, I know the capital firepower that SA Inc has will lay the foundation for the next few decades of economic growth. Low profits with high risks, however, are commercial growth killers. The second half of the quote from Henry Ford is also relevant: ‘But when anyone tries to run a business solely for profit, then also the business must die, for it no longer has a reason for existence.’ I believe SA Inc understands that it is not here just for the money because it has held on in tough times. Add confidence, and make sound economic decisions, and a lot of talent and capital can help take the country forward. But indecision and senseless words will sink us all. Our leaders need to grow a pair A big warning is also needed here in that even if SA gets its act together and confidence increases, it will take a few years to get to 3-4% growth again – and profits may still be a way off as rebuilding and real investing takes time. But government will have to start soon or it will take even longer. Note: The private sector, corporate sector, or SA Inc here refers to the non-financial sector (excluding agriculture and forestry). It is often referred to as the real economy or the heart of the economy. It includes SOEs but excludes, banks, financial brokers, insurance companies, asset managers as well as government and its agencies such as Sanral (the South African National Roads Agency).