Minister of Finance Tito Mboweni has credited the the Office of the Tax Ombud (OTO) with having been “exemplary in delivering a much-needed service to taxpayers” that provides a “free, independent and impartial avenue” in handling taxpayer complaints and restoring public confidence in the South African Revenue Service (Sars). This will help promote “a healthy balance” between Sars’s powers and duties and taxpayers’ rights and obligations, he says. Read: Tax Ombud: ‘Systemic investigations the way forward’ Mboweni gives recognition to the Tax Ombud for maintaining its credibility in an era when “the economic slowdown, growing unemployment, crime and, lately, damning findings against government departments” is becoming normal. The recently released Tax Ombud March 2019 Annual Report discloses that taxpayer complaints increased to 4 822 (2018: 3 652). A total of 11 957 queries were received, 2 043 complaints were resolved, and 99.27% recommendations were implemented by Sars. Not all taxpayers are aware that Sars’s internal complaints resolution mechanisms must be exhausted before the ombud may be contacted. This resulted in 95% of taxpayer complaints being rejected by the ombud. The top 10 tax refunds paid to taxpayers through the intervention of the ombud exceeded R35 million. New systemic issues These issues result in undue hardship for taxpayers: Ongoing systemic issues Below are some of the ongoing systemic issues: In the five years of its existence, the OTO has made great strides in educating the public about their tax rights and obligations, and working closely with Sars to address systemic issues that are adversely impacting taxpayers. Full independence yet to be attained Still struggling to gain full independence from Sars, the ombud can now make appointments on its own (not through Sars) and its budget is determined by the minister (not Sars). However, the ombud does not yet have structural (juristic) independence, as it relies on Sars for supporting governance, fiduciary and administrative functions. This prevents it from becoming a member of the International Association of Ombuds. It has requested approval from the minister of finance to be established as a juristic entity. The OTO is pressing for amendments to the Tax Administration Act to enable it to carry out its mandate “independently, impartially and expeditiously”. It is also advocating for a comprehensive taxpayers’ bill of rights, which will improve the accountability of Sars and support an improved tax administration system. Listen to Tax Ombud Judge Bernard Ngoepe’s interview on SAfm Market Update with Moneyweb: <a href="http://iono.fm/e/742974">Content hosted by iono.fm</a>