Consumers are continuing to spend less on cars, with the average vehicle loan size in the third quarter (Q3) comparable to the Q2 of 2013, according to TransUnion Auto Information Solutions. “This suggests that consumer buying power has effectively remained flat for the past six years,” said Kriben Reddy, head of TransUnion Auto Information Solutions on Tuesday. Reddy added that consumers are still opting for less expensive entry-level vehicles and there was a shift in Q3 to vehicles priced under R200 000, as consumers continued to feel strain on their disposable income. His comments coincided with the release by TransUnion of its latest vehicle price index report, which revealed that vehicles priced at under R200 000 accounted for 38% of transactions in the quarter. Vehicles that cost more than R300 000 accounted for 34% of transactions and vehicles priced at between R200 000 and R300 000, for 28% of transactions. Read: Sales incentives and soft loans prop up vehicle sales Shift from new to used The report showed the used-to-new vehicle ratio increased from 2.08 used vehicles sold for every new vehicle sold in Q3 2018, to 2.26 used vehicles for every new vehicle purchased in Q3 2019. Reddy said the make-up of used vehicle sales is also shifting, with 36% of used vehicles financed under two years old and 6% of those being ex-demo models. He said this indicates that consumers are opting for older vehicles, as pressure on disposable income increases. Economist Mike Schüssler said the BankservAfrica Disposable Salary Index revealed there had only been a 0.5% or 1% real increase in take-home pay for about the past seven years and the upper income tax brackets had largely remained unchanged. This had resulted in bracket creep, with a greater number of taxpayers moving into these higher tax brackets. Schüssler said the upper income echelons had also been squeezed by above-inflation medical aid premiums and other price shocks, such as sharply higher electricity tariffs. “So even the richer folk in South Africa haven’t had real increases for quite a while and it’s meant they haven’t been able to buy vehicles as they could before. “Effectively there has been a decrease in new car sales and ultimately people have also been buying down and keeping their cars for longer,” he said. Azar Jammine, chief economist at Econometrix, said vehicle sales are now essentially more or less where they were in 2013. Jammine said there were modest increases in vehicle sales in 2014 and 2015, followed by a sharp downturn in sales in the recession in 2016 and a slight recovery in 2017. But Jammine said there were renewed downturns last year and this year as vehicle sales followed economic growth patterns. “Were it not for low vehicle inflation, things [vehicle sales] would have been a lot worse,” he said. Price increases TransUnion’s index revealed that new vehicle prices increased by 3.3% in Q3 2019, from 3.1% in the previous quarter and 2.3% in Q3 2018. Used vehicle inflation decreased to 1.1% in Q3 2019, from 1% in Q2 and 2.1% in Q3 2018. The index measures the relationship between the increase in vehicle pricing for new and used vehicles from a basket of passenger vehicles, which incorporates 15 top volume manufacturers, with vehicle sales data collated from across the industry to create the index. Reddy said new vehicle price increases have remained below inflation for the past two years – the longest consecutive period since the creation of the index in 2000. He said used vehicle price increases had slowed, indicative that the used market was also taking the strain. Financing Despite lower price increases, the number of new vehicles financed in Q3 2019 dropped by 7% compared with the same period a year ago, while the number of used vehicles financed increased by 1%, he said. Reddy said the sluggish market reflected ongoing low consumer and business confidence, reiterating the weak domestic demand conditions. “Although interest rates fell by 25 basis points in July, which offered consumers additional spending power, many consumers have opted to delay vehicle purchasing decisions due to the ongoing economic uncertainty,” he said. Reddy said this would inevitably have a negative effect on the local automotive industry, which is a major contributor to South Africa’s GDP. He stressed the bad news for the industry is that local market conditions are unlikely to change in the foreseeable future. “The industry is trending in a downward direction and unless certain structural changes take place in the economy, the picture is not going to change for the local auto industry,” he said. Listen to Nompu Siziba’s interview with Reddy on the SAfm Market Update with Moneyweb: <a href="http://iono.fm/e/763828">Content hosted by iono.fm</a>