Here’s what caught our attention on Monday: 1. Necsa’s plans to beat the courts Necsa will be making a third court bid to attempt to have suspended board members and the head of legal, Vusi Malebana removed. Moneyweb is reporting that Necsa has already been defeated twice in court and has blown about R2 billion in legal costs on the matter. According to a recording the board has plans to get rid of Malebana and mines and energy minister, Gwede Mantashe is aware of it. Read: Nuclear energy company’s not-so-secret plan to beat the courts 2. What will October hold for Eskom? Plans for Eskom’s reform keep hitting a brick wall, but October is set to be a crucial month as a number of key decisions and changes are due. According to Bloomberg, Eskom will appoint its new chief executive officer to take over from acting CEO Jabu Mabuza this month. Public enterprises minister Pravin Gordhan is expected to release a special policy paper that will spell out the government’s planned future for Eskom. While the utility’s CRO Freeman Nomvalo is working on the utility’s debt reorganisation. Read: Five key things to watch for as SA acts to fix Eskom 3. Highest growth in home loans in nine years South African banks are increasing their lending to home buyers. This is according to the Reserve Bank’s data which shows residential mortgage increases by banks increased by 4.9% year on year in August. This is the highest recorded growth since November 2010. According to FNB property economist Siphamandla Mkhwanazi, the uptick in mortgage advances by banks will be positive for South Africa’s residential property market. Read: Highest growth in home loans since 2010 4. Adapt IT results Software company Adapt IT is reporting an 8% fall in headline earnings per share to 57.27 cents for the year ended June 30, 2019. Earnings per share decreased by 29% to 51.32 cents and revenue of R1.43 billion is being reported, up 8%. The company says revenue growth comprised of 5% organic growth from continuing operations and 9% from acquisitions. The board has elected to defer a dividend decision until after December 31, 2019. Read: Adapt IT’s annual profit slides 5. Rand update The rand is maintaining its strong position after firming to R14.75 on Friday, the best performer among emerging market currencies. The movement comes after US president Donald Trump said trade talks with China were going well. The two nations met last week to re-opon negotiations relating to trade, keeping investors on the sidelines. This week, South Africa can expect retail sales data for August. On Monday, the rand was at R14.82 to the dollar at 9:13.