South African Revenue Service (Sars) Commissioner Edward Kieswetter says he needs clarity from US-based consulting firm Bain & Company about its role at the revenue service following the public resignation by its local partner. Athol Williams, a senior lecturer specialising in corporate responsibility and ethical leadership at the University of Cape Town, was hired by the firm as a management consultant to help the company clean up its reputation after it was found to have played an instrumental role in Sars’s capture. Bain was hired in 2015 shortly after former commissioner Tom Moyane joined Sars and was tasked with restructuring the revenue service’s operating model to improve efficiencies. However this only resulted in weakening critical governance and enforcement units and displacing hundreds of employees. Read: Sars – Please protect me from yourself Announcing his resignation, Williams said Bain had not been transparent about its full role in the decimation of Sars, a charge the company denies. But Kieswetter is not convinced. “The evidence suggests that they were aware or, they ought to have been aware that they had become complicit in a corrupt agenda,” he told Moneyweb on the sidelines of the official relaunch of the revenue service’s Large Business Centre (LBC) on Wednesday. “So when it is claimed by their head of business in South Africa that the reason he has resigned is because Bain didn’t disclose, I think there is something there. What are they not telling us? “So as far as I am concerned, I need a greater level of disclosure from them myself,” he said, adding that he will engage Bain on this when he has the opportunity to meet with the firm’s representatives. Three issues Kieswetter said there are three issues Bain must answer to – the first being to recover the money Bain was paid for its services, which has already been done. He confirmed that the company has paid back a total of R214 million, which includes interest. The second involves answering for the damage that it caused to Sars, which Kieswetter described as “incalculable”. Read: SA faces possible tax revenue shortfall of R50-R98bn “Answering to that means [that] when asked the question directly, they must give frank and honest responses,” he explained. The third is determining whether Bain was wilfully and wittingly contracted to damage Sars, which would be criminal. Kieswetter says the matter has been handed over to the Hawks and the National Prosecution Authority. Large Business Centre One of the casualties of Bain’s restructuring model was the LBC. Its functions were fragmented and “eviscerated to the detriment both of governance and revenue collection,” according to Judge Robert Nugent, who headed the Commission of Inquiry into Tax Administration and Governance at Sars. The unit provided specialised end-to-end services to large corporates and high-net-worth individuals to ensure compliance among these clients. At its peak, the unit accounted for 30% of the revenue collected by Sars. After it was disbanded, the relationship between Sars and the clients it previously served deteriorated, with industry bodies testifying that the frustration felt by businesses was reflected in declining tax morality. Kieswetter said that Bain’s decentralising of the unit had resulted in the loss of 115 specialised auditors in the LBC alone. The picture becomes bleaker when one looks at the whole organisation. He said that since 2014 Sars has lost over 3 000 employees, 2 200 of which were resignations. The exodus includes employees with core competencies such as compliance and investigative auditors and customs officials. “You can see that during this period the capability of Sars really suffered.” Rebuilding The re-established LBC is part of the revenue service’s journey of renewal, which is expected to encourage greater voluntary compliance by South Africa’s corporates. The taxpayer segment the centre will be servicing includes businesses with a turnover greater than R1 billion, companies listed on the JSE, financial services and mining companies with a turnover greater than R500 million, and multinational companies irrespective of their turnover. In addition, the LBC will assist ultra-high-net-worth individuals whose total assets exceed R75 million. Read: Tax is an important weapon in clawing back ‘ill-gotten gains These clients will be allocated tax teams who have specialised knowledge about their business. Those with complex tax portfolios and those operating in multiple jurisdictions will be assisted by these highly skilled teams to ensure that they understand their obligations, but also to improve Sars’s efficiency with regards to assessments, audits and dispute resolution processes. “We want to become the global benchmark again and regain trust among taxpayers,” said Kieswetter. A lack of trust between taxpayers and Sars led to a decrease in tax morality and a weakened structure also provided an opportunity for non-compliance. These factors, together with an underperforming economy, mean that Sars will fail to meet National Treasury’s revenue collection target for the sixth year in a row. Kieswetter said Sars is currently working with Treasury to finalise the extent of the shortfall, which will be announced in the mid-term budget speech next week.