<a href="https://iono.fm/e/763826">Content hosted by iono.fm</a> NOMPU SIZIBA: The South African government has made significant announcements around improving the trajectory of the local economy. Recently the Department of Mineral Resources and Energy released the Final Integrated Resources Plan 2019; and today, October 29, the Department of Public Enterprises released the highly anticipated road map for Eskom’s future. Minister in the DPE, Pravin Gordhan, confirmed that Eskom would be split into three – generation, transmission and distribution. In generation the government is going to allow a situation where independent power generators compete directly with Eskom, while the transmission division will buy power directly from power generators and serve as the country’s systems operator, while maintaining the country’s critical transmissions infrastructure. A new CEO for Eskom is said to be announced sometime next week, and then the big government announcement will come from the finance minister, Tito Mboweni, tomorrow on the government’s medium-term plans in terms of its priorities and the anticipated revenue and expenditure predicted over the period – as well as, critically, the country’s debt picture. Well, to discuss these issues I’m joined on the line by Maarten Ackerman, chief economist at Citadel, and by James Formby, CEO at RMB. Thanks very much, gentleman, for chatting to us. The big news today was the announcement by Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan. It was packed with information – the creation of more competition at the generation level, the separation of the entities; and they are supposedly to be formally in play by the end of March next year. Then, on top of that, the minister talked about a move towards seeing how they can deal with the labour issues at Eskom in consultation with labour, and a whole lot more. Did the announcement inspire confidence about the direction of Eskom? Let me start with you, Maarten. MAARTEN ACKERMAN: Nompu, yes, to be honest I expected a little bit more. They’ve been busy with this for quite a while, and this is what we got at this point in time. It’s not all bad, but they didn’t say anything about the debt side of it, which is basically now left to tomorrow’s budget meeting. I think in reality the next point will be to see how much of this we can do by March next year. So, where we are in South Africa, whether it’s about Eskom or policy reform or government’s economic plan – all of those matters – we are at the point to say, well, it’s one thing to have it on paper, it’s another to start implementing it. That’s very important. This is quite a comprehensive plan, and we can talk about it a bit more in detail. But the next thing is to ask, well, will we be able to actually implement some of this with success. That’s crucial. NOMPU SIZIBA: That’s right. James, the timelines are very tight, as Maarten says. But were you inspired by what Minister Pravin Gordhan had to say? JAMES FORMBY: Nompu, yes. I had a brief time to look at it, and I think, as Maarten said, it is progress and it certainly adds some detail to the direction that has been broadly communicated, which is very positive. I think that what we really do need to see is more detail on the financing side, as he says, and I’m really hoping that Minister Mboweni is able to provide a little more detail, either tomorrow or in the near future, because that is the big question on everyone’s mind – how, from a financial sustainability perspective, to really set Eskom on the right footing. We’ve seen some clear direction now on the operational side, but the financial sustainability is critical. NOMPU SIZIBA: Yes. Mr Gordhan was quite categorical that his colleague, Minister Mboweni, was going to deal with that very issue tomorrow. But it remains to be seen. On that front, Maarten, what are your expectations? We’ve heard about this Special Appropriation Bill that was effectively passed to the tune of R59 billion, and it’s pretty much what we all expected. It was something that was announced earlier, and we know that the fiscus is in a huge mess. What other announcement could Mr Mboweni possibly make around financing for Eskom? MAARTEN ACKERMAN: We were hoping today to see some plan round the financing side, just to make the budget tomorrow a little easier because with that in front of the fiscus it creates an even more difficult budget. So I think tomorrow isn’t going to be an easy task. It is probably one of the most difficult budgets that we are going to hear and witness. There are two sides to this. The one is that the capital expenditure was much smaller than expected in February, which includes a lot of these kinds of state-owned-enterprise bailouts. And the other one is that the revenue collection is way below budget as a result of very slow economic growth, a very weak demand side of the economy. So low personal and corporate taxes definitely are definitely creating a gaping crocodile jaw, so to speak, between expenditure and income. So hopefully what we can see tomorrow is – we can’t see any plans in terms of increasing revenue, because we are taxed to the limit. The only plan we can make there is to ask, well, what do we do to kick-start the economy. That’s part of the minister’s economic plan – to say, well, if we can get economic growth going, and we keep the tax rates the same, revenue can increase going forward. And, also importantly, what can we do to reduce expenditure? This is probably the first time ever where Treasury asks a lot of the departments to indicate where they can cut expenditure by 5 to 10%. So I hope that some of that is in tomorrow’s budget, which will then relieve expenditure going forward, and will create some room to manoeuvre in terms of where we need money for state-owned enterprises and crucial areas in the economy. NOMPU SIZIBA: James, you lead a major financial services firm. What pressing metrics or issues will you be looking out for when Finance Minister Tito Mboweni delivers his speech tomorrow? JAMES FORMBY: Nompu, one of those areas we really hope for is that there is a little more clarity on how the government plans to deal with some of the infrastructure backlog that exists. We’d love to see a little more clarity, perhaps tomorrow or in the coming weeks, on the infrastructure fund, but also specifically on support for public-private partnerships. As has just been said, when the government is running out of financial capacity, but also to some degree the human capacity, to deliver the really large infrastructure that the country needs, we’d really love to see government partner crowd the private sector in, where there is ample capital and skills to help. I think there is both some economic infrastructure and social infrastructure – economic where the user can pay, for example, for toll roads and the Gautrain; and social infrastructure like schools, water and sanitation. All of this infrastructure is suited to this kind of model – public-private partnerships, where we really can get a better outcome for South Africa that’s better than for money for the taxpayer, and which transfers some of the risk of delivery over to the private sector, where the government has a fixed cost, effectively, for delivering certain services. We are definitely seeing some good progress and more engagement with different departments over recent times. But, other than the IPPs [independent power producers], which are a type of public-private partnership – they are really a concession – outside of the IPP programme, over the past five years there hasn’t been a single PPP [public-private partnership] executed. One is quite close now. We’d really love to see the pipeline starting to fill, and much more execution on this scene. NOMPU SIZIBA: Maarten, I think what James just said is very pivotal in the sense that, if you don’t have a government that works, the rest of society can’t work, and the wheels of the economy can’t work as well. How pivotal do you think what James has said, is? MAARTEN ACKERMAN: I think it is crucial. For governments in any country around the world the objective is to create the right playing field. And it’s really the private sector that makes things work, with different incentives. The private sector has a profit incentive. Government has a very different incentive compared to that. So for a number of years we have unfortunately moved between government and the private sector, and given what we are facing in the economy, government is also opening up more and more to that idea. We are going into an era when again, I think, we are going to see more working together between government and the private sector – whether in communication, finance or medical. In reality it’s a combination of skills, know-how – and it can be financing. But, very importantly, it is for government to create the environment for all of that to succeed. When I say create the environment, a lot of the policy reform is currently in the pipeline. So that’s the right incentive from a tax point of view, from a governance point of view, from labour and, and, and – so that you then create that environment to pull everybody in and consolidate the interest in the right areas and, as a result, get proper results. NOMPU SIZIBA: Maarten, still with you, the public-sector wage bill has continued to grow, and it’s the largest item on the government’s expenditure list. I think it accounts for about 45% of their expenditure. Do you think that’s an area that Minister Mboweni is going to visit? And, if he is going to visit it, how can they work on bringing that bill down as a proportion of their total expenditure, because obviously the unions would be very anti any moves to retrench and so on. You can only leverage off attrition to a certain degree. So how do you find the balance there? MAARTEN ACKERMAN: Yes, that is a major challenge. The wage bill in South Africa is a percentage of GDP – in other words, for the size of our economy it’s the biggest in all OECD [Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development] countries. So it’s not only how government warns about that, but the rating agencies and the IMF [International Monetary Fund] and everybody is warning that this is unsustainable going forward. It’s one thing to have a wage bill like that if in line with that you’ve got the same output in terms of productivity – which unfortunately is not the case with us at the moment. So there are a few things we need to address. It is actually the increases in pay – I might say, over the past year, if you look at the public-sector wage increases when it gets to inflation – where there has been quite a decline compared to past decades. So that is a positive. The second thing is to get the head count down. I think that’s the tricky question that you are referring to, because in that mix, do you just go and fire people, do you just cap new employment – or do you just wait for people to retire or take early retirement? I think there has been a lot of talk about early retirement, not including the workforce. I think where we are right now, we probably need a little more of that. And, again, back to the Eskom plan, SAA, part of the problem is we are too heavy in terms of the number of people working there. The World Bank said that Eskom is about 66% overstaffed compared to similar organisations in the world that generate the same amount of electricity. It is a tough one, especially for government thinking about the people on the ground, the voter base. This is a challenge that they are aware of, but they probably haven’t seen enough muscle in terms of addressing this to make it more sustainable going forward. So I think at the moment it will remain a challenge for government. NOMPU SIZIBA: James, Maarten touched on the rating agencies. We are anticipating what Moody’s will do come Friday. Being in the financial services sector of course we understand that the reason we don’t want a downgrade to junk status is that it would effectively mean that South Africa would have to pay a higher premium to borrow money – and of course we do need money to be able to invest in development and so on. We are still a developing country. But it also has a direct impact on the financial services sector, hasn’t it? Can you just tell us, if we were to get a downgrade – although it’s largely anticipated that we won’t from Moody’s – how would that translate for banks, people in the financial services sector? Would they suddenly face higher amounts of money in terms of the wholesale market and so on? JAMES FORMBY: Nompu, a couple of points. The first one is that a downgrade raises the cost of capital, be it debt or equity. So it does make a market fundamentally less attractive. What it does for the financial sector is it forces a downgrade of all the banks across the market, because the big banks in South Africa are all tied to the sovereign’s rating. Ultimately that does place pressure on funding costs, because it raises them across the board. It makes it much more difficult for banks. Obviously there is pressure in the domestic market because of the rising price of interest on a global scale for the country – which links to the banks directly – and it also makes the South African banking system less competitive relative to banks from other countries that are better rated than us. So it does make it harder for banks across the board to compete and grow outside of South Africa, in addition to the immediate pressures it has for those that want to lend South Africa money. NOMPU SIZIBA: Our thanks to Maarten Ackerman and James Formby for their time this evening.