Emerging markets have rarely been so torn between trade-war tensions and optimism central banks will keep up their stimulus efforts, suggesting a week of greater-than-normal price swings is in prospect. The US and China are set to restart high-level trade negotiations in Washington on Thursday and Friday, with investors skeptical of a breakthrough as President Donald Trump battles Congress over its impeachment inquiry. Before that, all eyes will be on Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell’s speeches on Tuesday and Wednesday as investors seek clues on whether the central bank will enact a third-straight reduction in interest rates later this month. Signs that the world’s biggest economy is slowing weighed on developing-nation stocks for a third week, while currencies strengthened as the dollar wobbled.  Chinese officials are increasingly reluctant to agree to a broad trade deal pursued by President Donald Trump, according to people familiar with the discussions. While China plans to make an offer, it won’t include commitments on reforming Chinese industrial policy or the government subsidies that have been the target of longstanding US complaints, one of the people said. “Trump may push to announce some sort of progress, given weaker markets and economy, but I doubt it will have much substance,” said Peter Kisler, a money manager at North Asset Management in London. “We continue to be relatively bearish emerging-markets credit, although foreign exchange doesn’t look too bad.” Traders will also take their cue from China’s yuan fixing when the country’s markets re-open on Tuesday after a one-week holiday. Goldman Sachs Group Inc. remains negative on the currency in the near term as it expects US tariffs on Chinese imports to be increased on October 15. It’s also doubtful of a comprehensive trade agreement before the 2020 US election. While implied volatility for emerging-market currencies is at a two-month low, technical indicators suggest the calm may be about to end. The 50-day moving average is close to crossing above its 200-day measure. The last time that happened, in February 2018, it heralded a spike in volatility to a 2 1/2-year high in September that year. Events and data © 2019 Bloomberg L.P.