The Central Energy Fund (CEF) 2019 integrated annual report indicates that the group is profitable, liquid and solvent in spite of certain operational challenges. The group consists of African Exploration and Mining Finance Corporation (AEMFC) – responsible for securing South Africa’s energy supply; iGas – responsible for developing the gas infrastructure, Pasa – responsible for the promotion for and regulation of the upstream petroleum industry; PetroSA – responsible for the exploration and extraction of natural gas and oil; and the Strategic Fuel Fund (SFF) – responsible for acquiring and maintaining strategic fuel stocks. Strategic oil reserves – the ongoing saga The foremost question on everyone’s mind would be the latest update on the strategic oil reserves ongoing saga. To recap, 10.3 million barrels of South Africa’s strategic oil reserves were sold in 2015. The oil was sold for some $28 per barrel when the price of Brent crude oil at the time was between $37 and $44 per barrel. The Minister of Energy at the time was Tina Joemat-Pettersson, who further added to the controversy by insisting that the oil had been rotated and not sold. In July 2019 a forensic report on this transaction was submitted to Gwede Mantashe, Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources. An application has been lodged at the Western Cape High Court to set aside the disposal of the strategic crude oil stock on the grounds that these disposals were unlawful, invalid and unconstitutional. 2019 Financial highlights In a nutshell. Revenue increased by 13% to R13.2 billion. EBITDA decreased by 29% to R626 million. Cash increased by 10% to R18.9 billion. Capital investment increased by 285% to R1.1 billion. Higher investment income, reduction in operating expenses and improved working capital management generated R1.6 billion cash. The gearing ratio for the Group is 93% equity and 7% interest-bearing debt. The decline in the gross profit margin from 10% (R1.1 billion) to 7% (R865 million), is mainly attributable to the low production at the GTL refinery, Vlakfontein coal mine and low utilisation rate of the crude oil storage terminals. The Group reported an operating loss of R728 million (margin: -6%) due to the impairment of production and exploration assets. The net profit before tax increased to R309 million (2018 – R133 million). The increase was mainly due to the increase in investment income of R159 million and the decrease in finance costs of R39 million. The Group invested R1.1 billion (2018: R286 million) towards sustenance and growth. R724 million went towards the GTL refinery and Vlakfontein coal mine and R338 million was invested towards exploration activities, development of PetroSA Ghana oil blocks, and Vlakfontein mine extensions. The Group held assets of R38 billion consisting of cash of R18.9 billion, operating assets of R14.6 billion, investment in associates of R1.0 billion, and non-operating assets amounting to R3.4 billion. External interest-bearing debt The group has a low debt to equity ratio. Auditor-General (AG) audit report The AG issued an unqualified report with findings, including: Non-Financial Performance Highlights The Group is facing a future of depleting gas feedstock from PetroSA, and a possible loss of gas supplied by Sasol from Mozambique after 2023. This may be mitigated by the discovery of gas condensate (a light liquid hydrocarbon) in the Outeniqua Basin by Total (France). PetroSA has developed an emergency plan to address feedstock sourcing and refinery optimisation and will undertake a new refinery build feasibility study in partnership with Saudi Aramco. Hopefully, the court will rule that the strategic oil reserve disposals were unlawful, invalid and unconstitutional and that this will be followed by criminal charges against all those responsible.